{\rtf1\fbidis\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset1 Cambria Math;}{\f3\fnil\fcharset161 Calibri;}{\f4\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.18362}{\*\mmathPr\mmathFont2\mwrapIndent1440 }\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\ltrpar\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 Project Gutenberg\f1\rquote\f0 s First Six Books of the Elements of Euclid,\par
by John Casey\par
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with\par
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or\par
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included\par
with this eBook or online at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK www.gutenberg.net }}{\fldrslt{www.gutenberg.net\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\par
Title: The First Six Books of the Elements of Euclid\par
Subtitle: And Propositions I.-XXI. of Book XI., and an\par
Appendix on the Cylinder, Sphere, Cone, etc.,\par
Author: John Casey\par
Author: Euclid\par
Release Date: April 14, 2007 [EBook #21076]\par
Language: English\par
Character set encoding: TeX\par
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELEMENTS OF EUCLID ***\par
Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Keith Edkins and the\par
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.pgdp.net }}{\fldrslt{http://www.pgdp.net\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\par
(This file was produced from images from the Cornell University\par
Library: Historical Mathematics Monographs collection.)\par
Production Note\par
Cornell University Library produced this volume to replace the\par
irreparably deteriorated original. It was scanned using Xerox\par
software and equipment at 600 dots per inch resolution and compressed prior to storage using CCITT Group 4 compression. The\par
digital data were used to create Cornell\f1\rquote\f0 s replacement volume\par
on paper that meets the ANSI Standard Z39.48-1984. The production of this volume was supported in part by the Commission on\par
Preservation and Access and the Xerox Corporation. Digital\par
file copyright by Cornell University Library 1991.\par
Transcriber\f1\rquote\f0 s Note: The Index has been regenerated to fit the pagination of this edition. Despite\par
the author\f1\rquote\f0 s stated hope that \f1\ldblquote\f0 few misprints have escaped detection\f1\rdblquote  \f0 there were several, which\par
have here been corrected and noted at the end of the text.\par
CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY\par
THE EVAN WILHELM EVANS\par
MATHEMATICAL SEMINARY LIBRARY\par
THE GIFT OF\par
LUCIEN AUGUSTUS WAIT\par
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .\par
THE ELEMENTS OF EUCLID.\par
NOW READY\par
Price 3s.\par
A TREATISE ON ELEMENTARY TRIGONOMETRY,\par
With Numerous Examples and Questions for Examination.\par
Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged, Price 3s. 6d., Cloth.\par
A SEQUEL TO THE FIRST SIX BOOKS OF THE\par
ELEMENTS OF EUCLID,\par
Containing an Easy Introduction to Modern Geometry:\par
With numerous Examples.\par
Third Edition, Price 4s. 6d.; or in two parts, each 2s. 6d.\par
THE ELEMENTS OF EUCLID, BOOKS I.\f1\emdash VI., AND\par
PROPOSITIONS I.\emdash XXI., OF BOOK XI.;\par
Together with an Appendix on the Cylinder, Sphere,\par
Cone, &c.: with\par
Copious Annotations & numerous Exercises.\par
Price 6s.\par
A KEY TO THE EXERCISES IN THE FIRST SIX\par
BOOKS OF CASEY\rquote S ELEMENTS OF EUCLID.\par
Price 7s. 6d.\par
A TREATISE ON THE ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY OF\par
THE POINT, LINE, CIRCLE, & CONIC SECTIONS,\par
Containing an Account of its most recent Extensions,\par
With numerous Examples.\par
DUBLIN: HODGES, FIGGIS, & CO.\par
LONDON: LONGMANS & CO.\par
THE FIRST SIX BOOKS\par
OF THE\par
ELEMENTS OF EUCLID,\par
AND\par
PROPOSITIONS I.-XXI. OF BOOK XI.,\par
AND AN\par
APPENDIX ON THE CYLINDER, SPHERE,\par
CONE, ETC.,\par
WITH\par
COPIOUS ANNOTATIONS AND NUMEROUS EXERCISES.\par
BY\par
J O H N C A S E Y, LL. D., F. R. S.,\par
FELLOW OF THE ROYAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND;\par
MEMBER OF COUNCIL, ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY;\par
MEMBER OF THE MATHEMATICAL SOCIETIES OF LONDON AND FRANCE;\par
AND PROFESSOR OF THE HIGHER MATHEMATICS AND OF\par
MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS IN THE CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND.\par
THIRD EDITION, REVISED AND ENLARGED.\par
DUBLIN: HODGES, FIGGIS, & CO., GRAFTON-ST.\par
LONDON: LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO.\par
1885.\par
DUBLIN\par
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS,\par
BY PONSONBY AND WELDRICK\par
PREFACE.\par
This edition of the Elements of Euclid, undertaken at the request of the principals of some of the leading Colleges and Schools of Ireland, is intended to\par
supply a want much felt by teachers at the present day\emdash the production of a\par
work which, while giving the unrivalled original in all its integrity, would also\par
contain the modern conceptions and developments of the portion of Geometry\par
over which the Elements extend. A cursory examination of the work will show\par
that the Editor has gone much further in this latter direction than any of his\par
predecessors, for it will be found to contain, not only more actual matter than\par
is given in any of theirs with which he is acquainted, but also much of a special\par
character, which is not given, so far as he is aware, in any former work on the\par
subject. The great extension of geometrical methods in recent times has made\par
such a work a necessity for the student, to enable him not only to read with advantage, but even to understand those mathematical writings of modern times\par
which require an accurate knowledge of Elementary Geometry, and to which it\par
is in reality the best introduction.\par
In compiling his work the Editor has received invaluable assistance from the\par
late Rev. Professor Townsend, s.f.t.c.d. The book was rewritten and considerably altered in accordance with his suggestions, and to that distinguished\par
Geometer it is largely indebted for whatever merit it possesses.\par
The Questions for Examination in the early part of the First Book are intended as specimens, which the teacher ought to follow through the entire work.\par
Every person who has had experience in tuition knows well the importance of\par
such examinations in teaching Elementary Geometry.\par
The Exercises, of which there are over eight hundred, have been all selected\par
with great care. Those in the body of each Book are intended as applications of\par
Euclid\rquote s Propositions. They are for the most part of an elementary character,\par
and may be regarded as common property, nearly every one of them having\par
appeared already in previous collections. The Exercises at the end of each\par
Book are more advanced; several are due to the late Professor Townsend, some\par
are original, and a large number have been taken from two important French\par
works\emdash Catalan\rquote s Th\f0\'b4eor`emes et Probl`emes de G\'b4eom\'b4etrie El\'b4ementaire, and\par
the Trait\'b4e de G\'b4eom\'b4etrie, by Rouche\'b4 and De Comberousse.\par
The second edition has been thoroughly revised and greatly enlarged. The\par
new matter includes several alternative proofs, important examination questions\par
on each of the books, an explanation of the ratio of incommensurable quantities,\par
the first twenty-one propositions of Book XI., and an Appendix on the properties\par
of the Prism, Pyramids, Cylinder, Sphere, and Cone.\par
The present Edition has been very carefully read throughout, and it is hoped\par
that few misprints have escaped detection.\par
The Editor is glad to find from the rapid sale of former editions (each 3000\par
copies) of his Book, and its general adoption in schools, that it is likely to\par
i\par
accomplish the double object with which it was written, viz. to supply students\par
with a Manual that will impart a thorough knowledge of the immortal work\par
of the great Greek Geometer, and introduce them, at the same time, to some\par
of the most important conceptions and developments of the Geometry of the\par
present day.\par
JOHN CASEY.\par
86, South Circular-road, Dublin.\par
November, 1885.\par
ii\par
Contents\par
Introduction, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1\par
BOOK I.\par
Theory of Angles, Triangles, Parallel Lines, and parallelograms., . . . . . . . 2\par
Definitions, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2\par
Propositions i.\f1\endash xlviii., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8\par
Questions for Examination, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45\par
Exercises, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46\par
BOOK II.\par
Theory of Rectangles, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49\par
Definitions, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49\par
Propositions i.\endash xiv., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50\par
Questions for Examination, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65\par
Exercises, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66\par
BOOK III.\par
Theory of the Circle, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68\par
Definitions, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68\par
Propositions i.\endash xxxvii., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69\par
Questions for Examination, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97\par
Exercises, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98\par
BOOK IV.\par
Inscription and Circumscription of Triangles and of Regular Polygons in and\par
about Circles, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101\par
Definitions, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101\par
Propositions i.\endash xvi., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101\par
Questions for Examination, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112\par
Exercises, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112\par
BOOK V.\par
Theory of Proportion, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116\par
iii\par
Definitions, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116\par
Introduction, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116\par
Propositions i.\endash xxv., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121\par
Questions for Examination, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133\par
Exercises, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134\par
BOOK VI.\par
Application of the Theory of Proportion, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135\par
Definitions, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135\par
Propositions i.\endash xxxiii., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135\par
Questions for Examination, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163\par
BOOK XI.\par
Theory of Planes, Coplanar Lines, and Solid Angles, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171\par
Definitions, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171\par
Propositions i.\endash xxi., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171\par
Exercises, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181\par
APPENDIX.\par
Prism, Pyramid, Cylinder, Sphere, and Cone, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183\par
Definitions, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183\par
Propositions i.\endash vii., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183\par
Exercises, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192\par
NOTES.\par
A.\emdash Modern theory of parallel lines, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194\par
B.\emdash Legendre\rquote s proof of Euclid, i., xxxii., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194\par
,, Hamilton\rquote s ,, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195\par
C.\emdash To inscribe a regular polygon of seventeen sides in a circle\emdash Ampere\rquote s\par
solution simplified, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 196\par
D.\emdash To find two mean proportionals between two given lines\emdash Philo\rquote s solution, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197\par
,, Newton\rquote s solution, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197\par
E.\emdash McCullagh\rquote s proof of the minimum property of Philo\rquote s line, . . . . . . 198\par
F.\emdash On the trisection of an angle by the ruler and compass, . . . . . . . . 199\par
G.\emdash On the quadrature of the circle, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200\par
Conclusion, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202\par
iv\par
THE ELEMENTS OF EUCLID.\par
INTRODUCTION.\par
Geometry is the Science of figured Space. Figured Space is of one, two, or three\par
dimensions, according as it consists of lines, surfaces, or solids. The boundaries\par
of solids are surfaces; of surfaces, lines; and of lines, points. Thus it is the\par
province of Geometry to investigate the properties of solids, of surfaces, and\par
of the figures described on surfaces. The simplest of all surfaces is the plane,\par
and that department of Geometry which is occupied with the lines and curves\par
drawn on a plane is called Plane Geometry; that which demonstrates the properties of solids, of curved surfaces, and the figures described on curved surfaces,\par
is Geometry of Three Dimensions. The simplest lines that can be drawn on a\par
plane are the right line and circle, and the study of the properties of the point,\par
the right line, and the circle, is the introduction to Geometry, of which it forms\par
an extensive and important department. This is the part of Geometry on which\par
the oldest Mathematical Book in existence, namely, Euclid\rquote s Elements, is written, and is the subject of the present volume. The conic sections and other\par
curves that can be described on a plane form special branches, and complete\par
the divisions of this, the most comprehensive of all the Sciences. The student\par
will find in Chasles\rquote  Aper\f0\'b8cu Historique a valuable history of the origin and the\par
development of the methods of Geometry.\par
In the following work, when figures are not drawn, the student should construct them from the given directions. The Propositions of Euclid will be printed\par
in larger type, and will be referred to by Roman numerals enclosed in brackets.\par
Thus [III. xxxii.] will denote the 32nd Proposition of the 3rd Book. The number of the Book will be given only when different from that under which the\par
reference occurs. The general and the particular enunciation of every Proposition will be given in one. By omitting the letters enclosed in parentheses we\par
have the general enunciation, and by reading them, the particular. The annotations will be printed in smaller type. The following symbols will be used in\par
them:\f1\emdash\par
Circle will be denoted by J\par
Triangle ,, 4\par
Parallelogram ,,\par
Parallel lines ,, k\par
Perpendicular ,, \f2\u8869?\f0\par
In addition to these we shall employ the usual symbols +, \f2\u8722?\f0 , &c. of Algebra,\par
and also the sign of congruence, namely \f2\u8801?\f0 . This symbol has been introduced\par
by the illustrious Gauss.\par
1\par
BOOK I.\par
THEORY OF ANGLES, TRIANGLES, PARALLEL LINES, AND\par
PARALLELOGRAMS.\par
DEFINITIONS.\par
The Point.\par
i. A point is that which has position but not dimensions.\par
A geometrical magnitude which has three dimensions, that is, length, breadth, and thickness, is a solid; that which has two dimensions, such as length and breadth, is a surface; and\par
that which has but one dimension is a line. But a point is neither a solid, nor a surface, nor\par
a line; hence it has no dimensions\f1\emdash that is, it has neither length, breadth, nor thickness.\par
The Line.\par
ii. A line is length without breadth.\par
A line is space of one dimension. If it had any breadth, no matter how small, it would\par
be space of two dimensions; and if in addition it had any thickness it would be space of three\par
dimensions; hence a line has neither breadth nor thickness.\par
iii. The intersections of lines and their extremities are points.\par
iv. A line which lies evenly between its extreme\par
points is called a straight or right line, such as AB.\par
If a point move without changing its direction it will describe a right line. The direction in\par
which a point moves in called its \ldblquote sense.\rdblquote  If the moving point continually changes its direction\par
it will describe a curve; hence it follows that only one right line can be drawn between two\par
points. The following Illustration is due to Professor Henrici:\emdash\ldblquote If we suspend a weight by a\par
string, the string becomes stretched, and we say it is straight, by which we mean to express\par
that it has assumed a peculiar definite shape. If we mentally abstract from this string all\par
thickness, we obtain the notion of the simplest of all lines, which we call a straight line.\rdblquote\par
The Plane.\par
v. A surface is that which has length and breadth.\par
A surface is space of two dimensions. It has no thickness, for if it had any, however small,\par
it would be space of three dimensions.\par
vi. When a surface is such that the right line joining any two arbitrary\par
points in it lies wholly in the surface, it is called a plane.\par
A plane is perfectly flat and even, like the surface of still water, or of a smooth floor.\emdash\par
Newcomb.\par
2\par
Figures.\par
vii. Any combination of points, of lines, or of points and lines in a plane, is\par
called a plane figure. If a figure be formed of points only it is called a stigmatic\par
figure; and if of right lines only, a rectilineal figure.\par
viii. Points which lie on the same right line are called collinear points. A\par
figure formed of collinear points is called a row of points.\par
The Angle.\par
ix. The inclination of two right lines extending out from one point in different\par
directions is called a rectilineal angle.\par
x. The two lines are called the legs, and the point the vertex of the angle.\par
A light line drawn from the vertex and turning about it\par
in the plane of the angle, from the position of coincidence\par
with one leg to that of coincidence with the other, is said to\par
turn through the angle, and the angle is the greater as the\par
quantity of turning is the greater. Again, since the line may\par
turn from one position to the other in either of two ways,\par
two angles are formed by two lines drawn from a point.\par
Thus if AB, AC be the legs, a line may turn from the\par
position AB to the position AC in the two ways indicated\par
by the arrows. The smaller of the angles thus formed is to be\par
understood as the angle contained by the lines. The larger,\par
called a re-entrant angle, seldom occurs in the \ldblquote Elements.\rdblquote\par
xi. Designation of Angles.\emdash A particular angle in a figure is denoted by\par
three letters, as BAC, of which the middle one, A, is at the vertex, and the\par
other two along the legs. The angle is then read BAC.\par
xii. The angle formed by joining two or more angles together is called\par
their sum. Thus the sum of the two angles ABC, P QR is the angle AB0R,\par
formed by applying the side QP to the side BC,\par
so that the vertex Q shall fall on the vertex B,\par
and the side QR on the opposite side of BC\par
from BA.\par
xiii. When the sum of two angles BAC,\par
CAD is such that the legs BA, AD form one\par
right line, they are called supplements of each\par
other.\par
Hence, when one line stands on another, the two angles which it makes on the same side\par
of that on which it stands are supplements of each other.\par
3\par
xiv. When one line stands on another, and\par
makes the adjacent angles at both sides of itself\par
equal, each of the angles is called a right angle,\par
and the line which stands on the other is called a\par
perpendicular to it.\par
Hence a right angle is equal to its supplement.\par
xv. An acute angle is one which is less than\par
a right angle, as A.\par
xvi. An obtuse angle is one which is greater than a right angle, as BAC.\par
The supplement of an acute angle is obtuse, and conversely, the supplement of an obtuse\par
angle is acute.\par
xvii. When the sum of two angles is a right angle,\par
each is called the complement of the other. Thus, if\par
the angle BAC be right, the angles BAD, DAC are\par
complements of each other.\par
Concurrent Lines.\par
xviii. Three or more right lines passing through\par
the same point are called concurrent lines.\par
xix. A system of more than three concurrent lines is called a pencil of lines.\par
Each line of a pencil is called a ray, and the common point through which the\par
rays pass is called the vertex .\par
The Triangle.\par
xx. A triangle is a figure formed by three right lines joined end to end. The\par
three lines are called its sides.\par
xxi. A triangle whose three sides are unequal is said to be scalene, as A;\par
a triangle having two sides equal, to be isosceles, as B; and and having all its\par
sides equal, to be equilateral, as C.\par
xxii. A right-angled triangle is one that has one of its angles a right angle,\par
as D. The side which subtends the right angle is called the hypotenuse.\par
4\par
xxiii. An obtuse-angled triangle is one that has one of its angles obtuse, as\par
E.\par
xxiv. An acute-angled triangle is one that has its three angles acute, as F.\par
xxv. An exterior angle of a triangle is one that is formed by any side and\par
the continuation of another side.\par
Hence a triangle has six exterior angles; and also each exterior angle is the supplement of\par
the adjacent interior angle.\par
The Polygon.\par
xxvi. A rectilineal figure bounded by more than three right lines is usually\par
called a polygon.\par
xxvii. A polygon is said to be convex when it has no re-entrant angle.\par
xxviii. A polygon of four sides is called a quadrilateral.\par
xxix. A quadrilateral whose four sides are equal is called a lozenge.\par
xxx. A lozenge which has a right angle is called a square.\par
xxxi. A polygon which has five sides is called a pentagon; one which has six\par
sides, a hexagon, and so on.\par
The Circle.\par
xxxii. A circle is a plane figure formed by a curved\par
line called the circumference, and is such that all right\par
lines drawn from a certain point within the figure to the\par
circumference are equal to one another. This point is\par
called the centre.\par
xxxiii. A radius of a circle is any right line drawn\par
from the centre to the circumference, such as CD.\par
xxxiv. A diameter of a circle is a right line drawn through the centre and\par
terminated both ways by the circumference, such as AB.\par
From the definition of a circle it follows at once that the path of a movable point in a\par
plane which remains at a constant distance from a fixed point is a circle; also that any point\par
P in the plane is inside, outside, or on the circumference of a circle according as its distance\par
from the centre is less than, greater than, or equal to, the radius.\par
Postulates.\par
Let it be granted that\emdash\par
i. A right line may be drawn from any one point to any other point.\par
When we consider a straight line contained between two fixed points which are its ends,\par
such a portion is called a finite straight line.\par
ii. A terminated right line may be produced to any length in a right line.\par
5\par
Every right line may extend without limit in either direction or in both. It is in these\par
cases called an indefinite line. By this postulate a finite right line may be supposed to be\par
produced, whenever we please, into an indefinite right line.\par
iii. A circle may be described from any centre, and with any distance from\par
that centre as radius.\par
If there be two points A and B, and if with any instruments,\par
such as a ruler and pen, we draw a line from A to B, this will\par
evidently have some irregularities, and also some breadth and\par
thickness. Hence it will not be a geometrical line no matter how nearly it may approach to\par
one. This is the reason that Euclid postulates the drawing of a right line from one point to\par
another. For if it could be accurately done there would be no need for his asking us to let it be\par
granted. Similar observations apply to the other postulates. It is also worthy of remark that\par
Euclid never takes for granted the doing of anything for which a geometrical construction,\par
founded on other problems or on the foregoing postulates, can be given.\par
Axioms.\par
i. Things which are equal to the same, or to equals, are equal to each other.\par
Thus, if there be three things, and if the first, and the second, be each equal to the third,\par
we infer by this axiom that the first is equal to the second. This axiom relates to all kinds of\par
magnitude. The same is true of Axioms ii., iii., iv., v., vi., vii., ix.; but viii., x., xi., xii., are\par
strictly geometrical.\par
ii. If equals be added to equals the sums will be equal.\par
iii. If equals be taken from equals the remainders will be equal.\par
iv. If equals be added to unequals the sums will be unequal.\par
v. If equals be taken from unequals the remainders will be unequal.\par
vi. The doubles of equal magnitudes are equal.\par
vii. The halves of equal magnitudes are equal.\par
viii. Magnitudes that can be made to coincide are equal.\par
The placing of one geometrical magnitude on another, such as a line on a line, a triangle\par
on a triangle, or a circle on a circle, &c., is called superposition. The superposition employed\par
in Geometry is only mental, that is, we conceive one magnitude placed on the other; and\par
then, if we can prove that they coincide, we infer, by the present axiom, that they are equal.\par
Superposition involves the following principle, of which, without explicitly stating it, Euclid\par
makes frequent use:\emdash\ldblquote Any figure may be transferred from one position to another without\par
change of form or size.\rdblquote\par
ix. The whole is greater than its part.\par
This axiom is included in the following, which is a fuller statement:\emdash\par
ix0\par
. The whole is equal to the sum of all its parts.\par
x. Two right lines cannot enclose a space.\par
This is equivalent to the statement, \ldblquote If two right lines have two points common to both,\par
they coincide in direction,\rdblquote  that is, they form but one line, and this holds true even when one\par
of the points is at infinity.\par
xi. All right angles are equal to one another.\par
This can be proved as follows:\emdash Let there be two right lines AB, CD, and two perpendiculars to them, namely, EF, GH, then if AB, CD be made to coincide by superposition, so\par
that the point E will coincide with G; then since a right angle is equal to its supplement, the\par
line EF must coincide with GH. Hence the angle AEF is equal to CGH.\par
xii. If two right lines (AB, CD) meet a third line (AC), so as to make the\par
sum of the two interior angles (BAC, ACD) on the same side less than two\par
right angles, these lines being produced shall meet at some finite distance.\par
6\par
This axiom is the converse of Prop. xvii., Book I.\par
Explanation of Terms.\par
Axioms.\emdash\ldblquote Elements of human reason,\rdblquote  according to Dugald Stewart, are\par
certain general propositions, the truths of which are self-evident, and which are\par
so fundamental, that they cannot be inferred from any propositions which are\par
more elementary; in other words, they are incapable of demonstration. \ldblquote That\par
two sides of a triangle are greater than the third\rdblquote  is, perhaps, self-evident; but\par
it is not an axiom, inasmuch as it can be inferred by demonstration from other\par
propositions; but we can give no proof of the proposition that \ldblquote things which are\par
equal to the same are equal to one another,\rdblquote  and, being self-evident, it is an\par
axiom.\par
Propositions which are not axioms are properties of figures obtained by processes of reasoning. They are divided into theorems and problems.\par
A Theorem is the formal statement of a property that may be demonstrated\par
from known propositions. These propositions may themselves be theorems or\par
axioms. A theorem consists of two parts, the hypothesis, or that which is assumed, and the conclusion, or that which is asserted to follow therefrom. Thus,\par
in the typical theorem,\par
If X is Y, then Z is W, (i.)\par
the hypothesis is that X is Y , and the conclusion is that Z is W.\par
Converse Theorems.\emdash Two theorems are said to be converse, each of the\par
other, when the hypothesis of either is the conclusion of the other. Thus the\par
converse of the theorem (i.) is\emdash\par
If Z is W, then X is Y. (ii.)\par
From the two theorems (i.) and (ii.) we may infer two others, called their\par
contrapositives. Thus the contrapositive\par
of (i.) is, If Z is not W, then X is not Y ; (iii.)\par
of (ii.) is, If X is not Y , then Z is not W. (iv.)\par
The theorem (iv.) is called the obverse of (i.), and (iii.) the obverse of (ii.).\par
A Problem is a proposition in which something is proposed to be done, such\par
as a line to be drawn, or a figure to be constructed, under some given conditions.\par
7\par
The Solution of a problem is the method of construction which accomplishes\par
the required end.\par
The Demonstration is the proof, in the case of a theorem, that the conclusion\par
follows from the hypothesis; and in the case of a problem, that the construction\par
accomplishes the object proposed.\par
The Enunciation of a problem consists of two parts, namely, the data, or\par
things supposed to be given, and the quaesita, or things required to be done.\par
Postulates are the elements of geometrical construction, and occupy the same\par
relation with respect to problems as axioms do to theorems.\par
A Corollary is an inference or deduction from a proposition.\par
A Lemma is an auxiliary proposition required in the demonstration of a\par
principal proposition.\par
A Secant or Transversal is a line which cuts a system of lines, a circle, or\par
any other geometrical figure.\par
Congruent figures are those that can be made to coincide by superposition. They agree in shape and size, but differ in position. Hence it follows,\par
by Axiom viii., that corresponding parts or portions of congruent figures are\par
congruent, and that congruent figures are equal in every respect.\par
Rule of Identity.\emdash Under this name the following principle will be sometimes\par
referred to:\emdash\ldblquote If there is but one X and one Y , then, from the fact that X is\par
Y , it necessarily follows that Y is X.\rdblquote\emdash Syllabus.\par
PROP. I.\emdash Problem.\par
On a given finite right line (AB) to construct an equilateral triangle.\par
Sol.\emdash With A as centre, and AB\par
as radius, describe the circle BCD\par
(Post. iii.). With B as centre, and BA\par
as radius, describe the circle ACE, cutting the former circle in C. Join CA,\par
CB (Post. i.). Then ABC is the equilateral triangle required.\par
Dem.\emdash Because A is the centre of\par
the circle BCD, AC is equal to AB\par
(Def. xxxii.). Again, because B is the\par
centre of the circle ACE, BC is equal to BA. Hence we have proved.\par
AC = AB,\par
and BC = AB.\par
But things which are equal to the same are equal to one another (Axiom i.);\par
therefore AC is equal to BC; therefore the three lines AB, BC, CA are equal\par
to one another. Hence the triangle ABC is equilateral (Def. xxi.); and it is\par
described on the given line AB, which was required to be done.\par
8\par
Questions for Examination.\par
1. What is the datum in this proposition?\par
2. What is the quaesitum?\par
3. What is a finite right line?\par
4. What is the opposite of finite?\par
5. In what part of the construction is the third postulate quoted? and for what purpose?\par
Where is the first postulate quoted?\par
6. Where is the first axiom quoted?\par
7. What use is made of the definition of a circle? What is a circle?\par
8. What is an equilateral triangle?\par
Exercises.\par
The following exercises are to be solved when the pupil has mastered the First Book:\emdash\par
1. If the lines AF, BF be joined, the figure ACBF is a lozenge.\par
2. If AB be produced to D and E, the triangles CDF and CEF are equilateral.\par
3. If CA, CB be produced to meet the circles again in G and H, the points G, F, H are\par
collinear, and the triangle GCH is equilateral.\par
4. If CF be joined, CF2 = 3AB2\par
.\par
5. Describe a circle in the space ACB, bounded by the line AB and the two circles.\par
PROP. II.\emdash Problem.\par
From a given point (A) to draw a right line equal to a given finite right line\par
(BC).\par
Sol.\emdash Join AB (Post. i.); on AB describe the equilateral triangle ABD [i.].\par
With B as centre, and BC as radius, describe the circle ECH (Post iii.). Produce DB to meet the circle ECH in E\par
(Post. ii.). With D as centre, and DE as\par
radius, describe the circle EF G (Post. iii.).\par
Produce DA to meet this circle in F. AF\par
is equal to BC.\par
Dem.\emdash Because D is the centre of\par
the circle EF G, DF is equal to DE\par
(Def. xxxii.). And because DAB is an\par
equilateral triangle, DA is equal to DB\par
(Def. xxi.). Hence we have\par
DF = DE,\par
and DA = DB;\par
and taking the latter from the former, the remainder AF is equal to the remainder BE (Axiom iii.). Again, because B is the centre of the circle ECH, BC is\par
equal to BE; and we have proved that AF is equal to BE; and things which\par
are equal to the same thing are equal to one another (Axiom i.). Hence AF\par
9\par
is equal to BC. Therefore from the given point A the line AF has been drawn\par
equal to BC.\par
It is usual with commentators on Euclid to say that he allows the use of the rule and\par
compass. Were such the case this Proposition would have been unnecessary. The fact is,\par
Euclid\rquote s object was to teach Theoretical and not Practical Geometry, and the only things\par
he postulates are the drawing of right lines and the describing of circles. If he allowed the\par
mechanical use of the rule and compass he could give methods of solving many problems that\par
go beyond the limits of the \ldblquote geometry of the point, line, and circle.\rdblquote\emdash See Notes D, F at the\par
end of this work.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Solve the problem when the point A is in the line BC itself.\par
2. Inflect from a given point A to a given line BC a line equal to a given line. State the\par
number of solutions.\par
PROP. III.\emdash Problem.\par
From the greater (AB) of two given right lines to cut off a part equal to (C)\par
the less.\par
Sol.\emdash From A, one of the extremities of\par
AB, draw the right line AD equal to C [ii.];\par
and with A as centre, and AD as radius, describe the circle EDF (Post. iii.) cutting AB\par
in E. AE shall be equal to C.\par
Dem.\emdash Because A is the centre of the circle\par
EDF, AE is equal to AD (Def. xxxii.), and\par
C is equal to AD (const.); and things which\par
are equal to the same are equal to one another\par
(Axiom i.); therefore AE is equal to C. Wherefore from AB, the greater of the two given lines, a part, AE, has been out off\par
equal to C, the less.\par
Questions for Examination.\par
1. What previous problem is employed in the solution of this?\par
2. What postulate?\par
3. What axiom in the demonstration?\par
4. Show how to produce the less of two given lines until the whole produced line becomes\par
equal to the greater.\par
PROP. IV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (BAC, EDF) have two sides (BA, AC) of one equal respectively to two sides (ED, DF) of the other, and have also the angles (A, D)\par
included by those sides equal, the triangles shall be equal in every respect\emdash that\par
is, their bases or third sides (BC, EF) shall be equal, and the angles (B, C)\par
at the base of one shall be respectively equal to the angles (E, F) at the base of\par
the other; namely, those shall be equal to which the equal sides are opposite.\par
10\par
Dem.\emdash Let us conceive the triangle\par
BAC to be applied to EDF, so that the\par
point A shall coincide with D, and the\par
line AB with DE, and that the point C\par
shall be on the same side of DE as F;\par
then because AB is equal to DE, the\par
point B shall coincide with E. Again,\par
because the angle BAC is equal to the\par
angle EDF, the line AC shall coincide with DF; and since AC is equal to DF\par
(hyp.), the point C shall coincide with F; and we have proved that the point B\par
coincides with E. Hence two points of the line BC coincide with two points of\par
the line EF; and since two right lines cannot enclose a space, BC must coincide\par
with EF. Hence the triangles agree in every respect; therefore BC is equal to\par
EF, the angle B is equal to the angle E, the angle C to the angle F, and the\par
triangle BAC to the triangle EDF.\par
Questions for Examination.\par
1. How many parts in the hypothesis of this Proposition? Ans. Three. Name them.\par
2. How many in the conclusion? Name them.\par
3. What technical term is applied to figures which agree in everything but position? Ans.\par
They are said to be congruent.\par
4. What is meant by superposition?\par
5. What axiom is made use of in superposition?\par
6. How many parts in a triangle? Ans. Six; namely, three sides and three angles.\par
7. When it is required to prove that two triangles are congruent, how many parts of one\par
must be given equal to corresponding parts of the other? Ans. In general, any three except\par
the three angles. This will be established in Props. viii. and xxvi., taken along with iv.\par
8. What property of two lines having two common points is quoted in this Proposition?\par
They must coincide.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The line that bisects the vertical angle of an isosceles triangle bisects the base perpendicularly.\par
2. If two adjacent sides of a quadrilateral be equal, and the diagonal bisects the angle\par
between them, their other sides are equal.\par
3. If two lines be at right angles, and if each bisect the other, then any point in either is\par
equally distant from the extremities of the other.\par
4. If equilateral triangles be described on the sides of any triangle, the distances between\par
the vertices of the original triangle and the opposite vertices of the equilateral triangles are\par
equal. (This Proposition should be proved after the student has read Prop. xxxii.)\par
PROP. V.\emdash Theorem.\par
The angles (ABC, ACB) at the base (BC) of an isosceles triangle are equal\par
to one another, and if the equal sides (AB, AC) be produced, the external angles\par
(DEC, ECB) below the base shall be equal.\par
11\par
Dem.\emdash In BD take any point F, and from\par
AE, the greater, cut off AG equal to AF [iii].\par
Join BG, CF (Post. i.). Because AF is equal to\par
AG (const.), and AC is equal to AB (hyp.), the\par
two triangles F AC, GAB have the sides F A,\par
AC in one respectively equal to the sides GA,\par
AB in the other; and the included angle A is\par
common to both triangles. Hence [iv.] the base\par
F C is equal to GB, the angle AF C is equal to\par
AGB, and the angle ACF is equal to the angle\par
ABG.\par
Again, because AF is equal to AG (const.),\par
and AB to AC (hyp.), the remainder, BF, is equal to CG (Axiom iii); and we\par
have proved that F C is equal to GB, and the angle BF C equal to the angle\par
CGB. Hence the two triangles BF C, CGB have the two sides BF, F C in one\par
equal to the two sides CG, GB in the other; and the angle BF C contained\par
by the two sides of one equal to the angle CGB contained by the two sides\par
of the other. Therefore [iv.] these triangles have the angle F BC equal to the\par
angle GCB, and these are the angles below the base. Also the angle F CB equal\par
to GBC; but the whole angle F CA has been proved equal to the whole angle\par
GBA. Hence the remaining angle ACB is equal to the remaining angle ABC,\par
and these are the angles at the base.\par
Observation.\emdash The great difficulty which beginners find in this Proposition is due to the fact\par
that the two triangles ACF, ABG overlap each\par
other. The teacher should make these triangles separate, as in the annexed diagram, and point out the\par
corresponding parts thus:\emdash\par
AF = AG,\par
AC = AB;\par
angle F AC = angle GAB.\par
Hence [iv.], angle ACF = angle ABG.\par
and angle AF C = angle AGB.\par
The student should also be shown how to apply one of the triangles to the other, so as to\par
bring them into coincidence. Similar Illustrations may be given of the triangles BF C, CGB.\par
The following is a very easy proof of this Proposition.\par
Conceive the 4 ACB to be turned, without alteration, round\par
the line AC, until it falls on the other side. Let ACD be its\par
new position; then the angle ADC of the displaced triangle\par
is evidently equal to the angle ABC, with which it originally\par
coincided. Again, the two 4s BAC, CAD have the sides\par
BA, AC of one respectively equal to the sides AC, AD of\par
the other, and the included angles equal; therefore [iv.] the\par
angle ACB opposite to the side AB is equal to the angle\par
ADC opposite to the side AC; but the angle ADC is equal\par
to ABC; therefore ACB is equal to ABC.\par
Cor.\emdash Every equilateral triangle is equiangular.\par
12\par
Def.\emdash A line in any figure, such as AC in the preceding diagram, which is\par
such that, by folding the plane of the figure round it, one part of the diagram\par
will coincide with the other, is called an axis of symmetry of the figure.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Prove that the angles at the base are equal without producing the sides. Also by\par
producing the sides through the vertex.\par
2. Prove that the line joining the point A to the intersection of the lines CF and BG is\par
an axis of symmetry of the figure.\par
3. If two isosceles triangles be on the same base, and be either at the same or at opposite\par
sides of it, the line joining their vertices is an axis of symmetry of the figure formed by them.\par
4. Show how to prove this Proposition by assuming as an axiom that every angle has a\par
bisector.\par
5. Each diagonal of a lozenge is an axis of symmetry of the lozenge.\par
6. If three points be taken on the sides of an equilateral triangle, namely, one on each side,\par
at equal distances from the angles, the lines joining them form a new equilateral triangle.\par
PROP. VI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two angles (B, C) of a triangle be equal, the sides (AC, AB) opposite to\par
them are also equal.\par
Dem.\emdash If AB, AC are not equal, one must be greater\par
than the other. Suppose AB is the greater, and that the\par
part BD is equal to AC. Join CD (Post. i.). Then the\par
two triangles DBC, ACB have BD equal to AC, and BC\par
common to both. Therefore the two sides DB, BC in one\par
are equal to the two sides AC, CB in the other; and the\par
angle DBC in one is equal to the angle ACB in the other\par
(hyp). Therefore [iv.] the triangle DBC is equal to the\par
triangle ACB\emdash the less to the greater, which is absurd; hence AC, AB are not\par
unequal, that is, they are equal.\par
Questions for Examination.\par
1. What is the hypothesis in this Proposition?\par
2. What Proposition is this the converse of?\par
3. What is the obverse of this Proposition?\par
4. What is the obverse of Prop. v.?\par
5. What is meant by an indirect proof?\par
6. How does Euclid generally prove converse Propositions?\par
7. What false assumption is made in the demonstration?\par
8. What does this assumption lead to?\par
PROP. VII\emdash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (ACB, ADB) on the same base (AB) and on the same side\par
of it have one pair of conterminous sides (AC, AD) equal to one another, the\par
other pair of conterminous sides (BC, BD) must be unequal.\par
13\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let the vertex of each triangle be without\par
the other. Join CD. Then because AD is equal to AC\par
(hyp.), the triangle ACD is isosceles; therefore [v.] the\par
angle ACD is equal to the angle ADC; but ADC is greater\par
than BDC (Axiom ix.); therefore ACD is greater than\par
BDC: much, more is BCD greater than BDC. Now if the\par
side BD were equal to BC, the angle BCD would be equal\par
to BDC [v.]; but it has been proved to be greater. Hence\par
BD is not equal to BC.\par
2. Let the vertex of one triangle ADB\par
fall within the other triangle ACB. Produce the sides AC, AD to E and F.\par
Then because AC is equal to AD (hyp.),\par
the triangle ACD is isosceles, and [v.]\par
the external angles ECD, F DC at the\par
other side of the base CD are equal; but\par
ECD is greater than BCD (Axiom ix.).\par
Therefore F DC is greater than BCD:\par
much more is BDC greater than BCD;\par
but if BC were equal to BD, the angle BDC would be equal to BCD [v.];\par
therefore BC cannot be equal to BD.\par
3. If the vertex D of the second triangle fall on the line BC, it is evident\par
that BC and BD are unequal.\par
Questions for Examination.\par
1. What use is made of Prop. vii.? Ans. As a lemma to Prop. viii.\par
2. In the demonstration of Prop. vii. the contrapositive of Prop. v. occurs; show where.\par
3. Show that two circles can intersect each other only in one point on the same side of\par
the line joining their centres, and hence that two circles cannot have more than two points of\par
intersection.\par
PROP. VIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (ABC, DEF) have\par
two sides (AB, AC) of one respectively\par
equal to two sides (DE, DF) of the\par
other, and have also the base (BC) of\par
one equal to the base (EF) of the other;\par
then the two triangles shall be equal, and\par
the angles of one shall be respectively\par
equal to the angles of the other\emdash namely,\par
those shall be equal to which the equal sides are opposite.\par
Dem.\emdash Let the triangle ABC be applied to DEF, so that the point B will\par
coincide with E, and the line BC with the line EF; then because BC is equal\par
to EF, the point C shall coincide with F. Then if the vertex A fall on the same\par
14\par
side of EF as the vertex D, the point A must coincide with D; for if not, let\par
it take a different position G; then we have EG equal to BA, and BA is equal\par
to ED (hyp.). Hence (Axiom i.) EG is equal to ED: in like manner, F G is\par
equal to F D, and this is impossible [vii.]. Hence the point A must coincide with\par
D, and the triangle ABC agrees in every respect with the triangle DEF; and\par
therefore the three angles of one are respectively equal to the three angles of the\par
other\emdash namely, A to D, B to E, and C to F, and the two triangles are equal.\par
This Proposition is the converse of iv., and is the second case of the congruence of triangles in the Elements.\par
Philo\rquote s Proof.\emdash Let the equal bases be applied as in the foregoing proof, but let the vertices\par
be on the opposite sides; then let BGC be the position which EDF takes. Join AG. Then\par
because BG = BA, the angle BAG = BGA. In like manner the angle CAG = CGA. Hence\par
the whole angle BAC = BGC; but BGC = EDF therefore BAC = EDF.\par
PROP. IX.\emdash Problem.\par
To bisect a given rectilineal angle (BAC).\par
Sol.\emdash In AB take any point D, and cut off\par
[iii.] AE equal to AD. Join DE (Post. i.), and\par
upon it, on the side remote from A, describe the\par
equilateral triangle DEF [i.] Join AF. AF bisects\par
the given angle BAC.\par
Dem.\emdash The triangles DAF, EAF have the\par
side AD equal to AE (const.) and AF common;\par
therefore the two sides DA, AF are respectively\par
equal to EA, AF, and the base DF is equal to\par
the base EF, because they are the sides of an\par
equilateral triangle (Def. xxi.). Therefore [viii.]\par
the angle DAF is equal to the angle EAF; hence\par
the angle BAC is bisected by the line AF.\par
Cor.\emdash The line AF is an axis of symmetry of the figure.\par
15\par
Questions for Examination.\par
1. Why does Euclid describe the equilateral triangle on the side remote from A?\par
2. In what case would the construction fail, if the equilateral triangle were described on\par
the other side of DE?\par
Exercises.\par
1. Prove this Proposition without using Prop. viii.\par
2. Prove that AF is perpendicular to DE.\par
3. Prove that any point in AF is equally distant from the points D and E.\par
4. Prove that any point in AF is equally distant from the lines AB, AC.\par
PROP. X.\emdash Problem.\par
To bisect a given finite right line (AB).\par
Sol.\emdash Upon AB describe an equilateral triangle\par
ACB [i.]. Bisect the angle ACB by the line CD [ix.],\par
meeting AB in D, then AB is bisected in D.\par
Dem.\emdash The two triangles ACD, BCD, have the\par
side AC equal to BC, being the sides of an equilateral\par
triangle, and CD common. Therefore the two sides\par
AC, CD in one are equal to the two sides BC, CD\par
in the other; and the angle ACD is equal to the angle\par
BCD (const.). Therefore the base AD is equal to the\par
base DB [iv.]. Hence AB is bisected in D.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Show how to bisect a finite right line by describing two circles.\par
2. Every point equally distant from the points A, B is in the line CD.\par
PROP. XI.\emdash Problem.\par
From a given point (C) in\par
a given right line (AB) to draw\par
a right line perpendicular to the\par
given line.\par
Sol.\emdash In AC take any point\par
D, and make CE equal to CD\par
[iii.]. Upon DE describe an equilateral triangle DF E [i.]. Join\par
CF. Then CF shall be at right angles to AB.\par
Dem.\emdash The two triangles DCF, ECF have CD equal to CE (const.) and\par
CF common; therefore the two sides CD, CF in one are respectively equal\par
to the two sides CE, CF in the other, and the base DF is equal to the base\par
EF, being the sides of an equilateral triangle (Def. xxi.); therefore [viii.] the\par
angle DCE is equal to the angle ECF, and they are adjacent angles. Therefore\par
(Def. xiii.) each of them is a right angle, and CF is perpendicular to AB at the\par
point C.\par
16\par
Exercises.\par
1. The diagonals of a lozenge bisect each other perpendicularly.\par
2. Prove Prop. xi. without using Prop. viii.\par
3. Erect a line at right angles to a given line at one of its extremities without producing\par
the line.\par
4. Find a point in a given line that shall be equally distant from two given points.\par
5. Find a point in a given line such that, if it be joined to two given points on opposite\par
sides of the line, the angle formed by the joining lines shall be bisected by the given line.\par
6. Find a point that shall be equidistant from three given points.\par
PROP. XII.\emdash Problem.\par
To draw a perpendicular to a given indefinite right line (AB) from a given\par
point (C) without it.\par
Sol.\emdash Take any point D on the\par
other side of AB, and describe\par
(Post. iii.) a circle, with C as centre, and CD as radius, meeting AB\par
in the points F and G. Bisect F G\par
in H [x.]. Join CH (Post. i.). CH\par
shall be at right angles to AB.\par
Dem.\emdash Join CF, CG. Then the\par
two triangles F HC, GHC have F H equal to GH (const.), and HC common; and the base CF equal to the base CG, being radii of the circle F DG\par
(Def. xxxii.). Therefore the angle CHF is equal to the angle CHG [viii.],\par
and, being adjacent angles, they are right angles (Def. xiii.). Therefore CH is\par
perpendicular to AB.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Prove that the circle cannot meet AB in more than two points.\par
2. If one angle of a triangle be equal to the sum of the other two, the triangle can be\par
divided into the sum of two isosceles triangles, and the base is equal to twice the line from its\par
middle point to the opposite angle.\par
PROP. XIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
The adjacent angles (ABC, ABD) which one right line (AB) standing on\par
another (CD) makes with it are either both right angles, or their sum is equal\par
to two right angles.\par
17\par
Dem.\emdash If AB is perpendicular to CD, as in fig. 1, the angles ABC, ABD\par
are right angles. If not, draw BE perpendicular to CD [xi.]. Now the angle\par
CBA is equal to the sum of the two angles CBE, EBA (Def. xi.). Hence,\par
adding the angle ABD, the sum of the angles CBA, ABD is equal to the sum\par
of the three angles CBE, EBA, ABD. In like manner, the sum of the angles\par
CBE, EBD is equal to the sum of the three angles CBE, EBA, ABD. And\par
things which are equal to the same are equal to one another. Therefore the sum\par
of the angles CBA, ABD is equal to the sum of the angles CBE, EBD; but\par
CBE, EBD are right angles; therefore the sum of the angles CBA, ABD is\par
two right angles.\par
Or thus: Denote the angle EBA by \f3\lang1032\'e8; then evidently\par
the angle CBA = right angle + \'e8;\par
the angle ABD = right angle \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'e8;\par
therefore CBA + ABD = two right angles.\par
Cor. 1.\f1\emdash The sum of two supplemental angles is two right angles.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash Two right lines cannot have a common segment.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash The bisector of any angle bisects the corresponding re-entrant angle.\par
Cor. 4.\emdash The bisectors of two supplemental angles are at right angles to each\par
other.\par
Cor. 5.\emdash The angle EBA is half the difference of the angles CBA, ABD.\par
PROP. XIV.\endash Theorem.\par
If at a point (B) in a right line (BA) two\par
other right lines (CB, BD) on opposite sides\par
make the adjacent angles (CBA, ABD) together equal to two right angles, these two\par
right lines form one continuous line.\par
Dem.\emdash If BD be not the continuation of\par
CB, let BE be its continuation. Now, since\par
CBE is a right line, and BA stands on it, the\par
sum of the angles CBA, ABE is two right\par
angles (xiii.); and the sum of the angles CBA, ABD is two right angles (hyp.);\par
18\par
therefore the sum of the angles CBA, ABE is equal to the sum of the angles\par
CBA, ABD. Reject the angle CBA, which is common, and we have the angle\par
ABE equal to the angle ABD\emdash that is, a part equal to the whole\emdash which is\par
absurd. Hence BD must be in the same right line with CB.\par
PROP. XV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two right lines (AB, CD) intersect one another, the opposite angles are\par
equal (CEA = DEB, and BEC = AED).\par
Dem.\emdash Because the line AE stands on CD,\par
the sum of the angles CEA, AED is two right\par
angles [xiii.]; and because the line CE stands on\par
AB, the sum of the angles BEC, CEA is two\par
right angles; therefore the sum of the angles CEA,\par
AED is equal to the sum of the angles BEC,\par
CEA. Reject the angle CEA, which is common,\par
and we have the angle AED equal to BEC. In\par
like manner, the angle CEA is equal to DEB.\par
The foregoing proof may be briefly given, by saying that opposite angles are\par
equal because they have a common supplement.\par
Questions for Examination on Props. XIII., XIV., XV.\par
1. What problem is required in Euclid\rquote s proof of Prop. xiii.?\par
2. What theorem? Ans. No theorem, only the axioms.\par
3. If two lines intersect, how many pairs of supplemental angles do they make?\par
4. What relation does Prop. xiv. bear to Prop. xiii.?\par
5. What three lines in Prop. xiv. are concurrent?\par
6. What caution is required in the enunciation of Prop. xiv.?\par
7. State the converse of Prop. xv. Prove it.\par
8. What is the subject of Props. xiii., xiv., xv.? Ans. Angles at a point.\par
PROP. XVI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If any side (BC) of a triangle (ABC) be produced, the exterior angle (ACD) is greater than either of the interior non-adjacent angles.\par
Dem.\emdash Bisect AC in E [x.]. Join BE (Post. i.).\par
Produce it, and from the produced part cut off EF\par
equal to BE [iii]. Join CF. Now because EC is\par
equal to EA (const.), and EF is equal to EB, the\par
triangles CEF, AEB have the sides CE, EF in one\par
equal to the sides AE, EB in the other; and the\par
angle CEF equal to AEB [xv.]. Therefore [iv.] the\par
angle ECF is equal to EAB; but the angle ACD is greater than ECF; therefore\par
the angle ACD is greater than EAB.\par
19\par
In like manner it may be shown, if the side AC be produced, that the exterior\par
angle BCG is greater than the angle ABC; but BCG is equal to ACD [xv.].\par
Hence ACD is greater than ABC. Therefore ACD is greater than either of the\par
interior non-adjacent angles A or B of the triangle ABC.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The sum of the three interior angles of the triangle BCF is equal\par
to the sum of the three interior angles of the triangle ABC.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The area of BCF is equal to the area of ABC.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash The lines BA and CF, if produced, cannot meet at any finite\par
distance. For, if they met at any finite point X, the triangle CAX would have\par
an exterior angle BAC equal to the interior angle ACX.\par
PROP. XVII.\emdash Theorem.\par
Any two angles (B, C) of a triangle (ABC) are together less than two right\par
angles.\par
Dem.\emdash Produce BC to D; then the exterior angle\par
ACD is greater than ABC [xvi.]: to each add the\par
angle ACB, and we have the sum of the angles ACD,\par
ACB greater than the sum of the angles ABC, ACB;\par
but the sum of the angles ACD, ACB is two right\par
angles [xiii.]. Therefore the sum of the angles ABC,\par
ACB is less than two right angles.\par
In like manner we may show that the sum of the angles A, B, or of the\par
angles A, C, is less than two right angles.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash Every triangle must have at least two acute angles.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If two angles of a triangle be unequal, the lesser must be acute.\par
Exercise.\par
Prove Prop. xvii. without producing a side.\par
PROP. XVIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If in any triangle (ABC) one side (AC) be greater than another (AB), the\par
angle opposite to the greater side is grater than the angle opposite to the less.\par
Dem.\emdash From AC cut off AD equal to AB\par
[iii]. Join BD (Post. i.). Now since AB is equal\par
to AD, the triangle ABD is isosceles; therefore [v.] the angle ADB is equal to ABD; but\par
the angle ADB is greater than the angle ACB\par
[xvi.]; therefore ABD is greater than ACB.\par
Much more is the angle ABC greater than the\par
angle ACB.\par
20\par
Or thus: From A as centre, with the lesser\par
side AB as radius, describe the circle BED,\par
cutting BC in E. Join AE. Now since AB is\par
equal to AE, the angle AEB is equal to ABE;\par
but AEB is greater than ACB (xvi.); therefore\par
ABE is greater than ACB.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If in the second method the circle cut the line CB produced through B, prove the\par
Proposition.\par
2. This Proposition may be proved by producing the less side.\par
3. If two of the opposite sides of a quadrilateral be respectively the greatest and least, the\par
angles adjacent to the least are greater than their opposite angles.\par
4. In any triangle, the perpendicular from the vertex opposite the side which is not less\par
than either of the remaining sides falls within the triangle.\par
PROP. XIX.\emdash Theorem.\par
If one angle (B) of a triangle (ABC) be greater than another angle (C), the\par
side (AC) which it opposite to the greater angle is greater than the side (AB)\par
which is opposite to the less.\par
Dem.\emdash If AC be not greater than AB, it must\par
be either equal to it or less than it. Let us examine\par
each case:\emdash\par
1. If AC were equal to AB, the triangle ACB\par
would be isosceles, and then the angle B would\par
be equal to C [v.]; but it is not by hypothesis;\par
therefore AB is not equal to AC.\par
2. If AC were less than AB, the angle B would\par
be less than the angle C [xviii.]; but it is not by hypothesis; therefore AC is\par
not less than AB; and since AC is neither equal to AB nor less than it, it must\par
be greater.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Prove this Proposition by a direct demonstration.\par
2. A line from the vertex of an isosceles triangle to any point in the base is less than either\par
of the equal sides, but greater if the point be in the base produced.\par
3. Three equal lines could not be drawn from the same point to the same line.\par
4. The perpendicular is the least line which can be drawn from a given point to a given\par
line; and of all others that may be drawn to it, that which is nearest to the perpendicular is\par
less than any one more remote.\par
5. If in the fig., Prop. xvi., AB be the greatest side of the 4 ABC, BF is the greatest\par
side of the 4 F BC, and the angle BF C is less than half the angle ABC.\par
6. If ABC be a 4 having AB not greater than AC, a line AG, drawn from A to any point\par
G in BC, is less than AC. For the angle ACB [xviii.] is not greater than ABC; but AGC\par
[xvi.] is greater than ABC; therefore AGC is greater than ACG. Hence AC is greater than\par
AG.\par
21\par
PROP. XX.\emdash Theorem.\par
The sum of any two sides (BA, AC) of a triangle (ABC) is greater than the\par
third.\par
Dem.\emdash Produce BA to D (Post. ii.),\par
and make AD equal to AC [iii.]. Join CD.\par
Then because AD is equal to AC, the angle\par
ACD is equal to ADC (v.); therefore the\par
angle BCD is greater than the angle BDC;\par
hence the side BD opposite to the greater\par
angle is greater than BC opposite to the\par
less [xix.]. Again, since AC is equal to AD,\par
adding BA to both, we have the sum of the\par
sides BA, AC equal to BD. Therefore the\par
sum of BA, AC is greater than BC.\par
Or thus: Bisect the angle BAC by AE [ix.] Then the angle BEA is greater than EAC;\par
but EAC = EAB (const.); therefore the angle BEA is greater than EAB. Hence AB is\par
greater than BE [xix.]. In like manner AC is greater than EC. Therefore the sum of BA,\par
AC is greater than BC.\par
Exercises.\par
1. In any triangle, the difference between any two sides is less than the third.\par
2. If any point within a triangle be joined to its angular points, the sum of the joining\par
lines is greater than its semiperimeter.\par
3. If through the extremities of the base of a triangle, whose sides are unequal, lines\par
be drawn to any point in the bisector of the vertical angle, their difference is less than the\par
difference of the sides.\par
4. If the lines be drawn to any point in the bisector of the external vertical angle, their\par
sum is greater than the sum of the sides.\par
5. Any side of any polygon is less than the sum of the remaining sides.\par
6. The perimeter of any triangle is greater than that of any inscribed triangle, and less\par
than that of any circumscribed triangle.\par
7. The perimeter of any polygon is greater than that of any inscribed, and less than that\par
of any circumscribed, polygon of the same number of sides.\par
8. The perimeter of a quadrilateral is greater than the sum of its diagonals.\par
Def.\emdash A line drawn from any angle of a triangle to the middle point of the opposite side\par
is called a median of the triangle.\par
9. The sum of the three medians of a triangle is less than its perimeter.\par
10. The sum of the diagonals of a quadrilateral is less than the sum of the lines which can\par
be drawn to its angular points from any point except the intersection of the diagonals.\par
PROP. XXI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two lines (BD, CD) be drawn to a point (D) within a triangle from the\par
extremities of its base (BC), their sum is less than the sum of the remaining\par
sides (BA, CA), but they contain a greater angle.\par
22\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Produce BD (Post. ii.) to meet\par
AC in E. Then, in the triangle BAE, the sum\par
of the sides BA, AE is greater than the side BE\par
[xx.]: to each add EC, and we have the sum\par
of BA, AC greater than the sum of BE, EC.\par
Again, the sum of the sides DE, EC of the triangle DEC is greater than DC: to each add BD,\par
and we get the sum of BE, EC greater than the\par
sum of BD, DC; but it has been proved that the sum of BA, AC is greater\par
than the sum of BE, EC. Therefore much more is the sum of BA, AC greater\par
than the sum of BD, DC.\par
2. The external angle BDC of the triangle DEC is greater than the internal\par
angle BEC [xvi.], and the angle BEC, for a like reason, is greater than BAC.\par
Therefore much more is BDC greater than BAC.\par
Part 2 may be proved without producing either of the sides BD, DC. Thus:\par
join AD and produce it to meet BC in F; then the angle BDF is greater than\par
the angle BAF [xvi.], and F DC is greater than F AC. Therefore the whole\par
angle BDC is greater than BAC.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The sum of the lines drawn from any point\par
within a triangle to its angular points is less than the\par
perimeter. (Compare Ex. 2, last Prop.)\par
2. If a convex polygonal line ABCD lie within\par
a convex polygonal line AMND terminating in the\par
same extremities, the length of the former is less than\par
that of the latter.\par
PROP. XXII.\emdash Problem.\par
To construct a triangle whose three sides shall be respectively equal to three\par
given lines (A, B, C), the sum of every two of which is greater than the third.\par
Sol.\emdash Take any right line DE, terminated at D, but unlimited towards E,\par
and cut off [iii.] DF equal to A, F G equal to B, and GH equal to C. With F\par
as centre, and F D as radius, describe the circle KDL (Post. iii.); and with G\par
as centre, and GH as radius, describe the circle KHL, intersecting the former\par
circle in K. Join KF, KG. KF G is the triangle required.\par
23\par
Dem.\emdash Since F is the centre of the circle KDL, FK is equal to F D; but\par
F D is equal to A (const.); therefore (Axiom i.) FK is equal to A. In like\par
manner GK is equal to C, and F G is equal to B (const.) Hence the three sides\par
of the triangle KF G are respectively equal to the three lines A, B, C.\par
Questions for Examination.\par
1. What is the reason for stating in the enunciation that the sum of every two of the given\par
lines must be greater than the third?\par
2. Prove that when that condition is fulfilled the two circles must intersect.\par
3. Under what conditions would the circles not intersect?\par
4. If the sum of two of the lines were equal to the third, would the circles meet? Prove\par
that they would not intersect.\par
PROP. XXIII.\emdash Problem.\par
At a given point (A) in a given right line (AB) to make an angle equal to a\par
given rectilineal angle (DEF).\par
Sol.\emdash In the sides ED, EF of the given angle take any arbitrary points D\par
and F. Join DF, and construct [xxii.] the triangle BAC, whose sides, taken in\par
order, shall be equal to those of DEF\emdash namely, AB equal to ED, AC equal to\par
EF, and CB equal to F D; then the angle BAC will [viii.] be equal to DEF.\par
Hence it is the required angle.\par
24\par
Exercises.\par
1. Construct a triangle, being given two sides and the angle between them.\par
2. Construct a triangle, being given two angles and the side between them.\par
3. Construct a triangle, being given two sides and the angle opposite to one of them.\par
4. Construct a triangle, being given the base, one of the angles at the base, and the sum\par
or difference of the sides.\par
5. Given two points, one of which is in a given line, it is required to find another point in\par
the given line, such that the sum or difference of its distances from the former points may be\par
given. Show that two such points may be found in each case.\par
PROP. XXIV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (ABC, DEF) have two sides (AB, AC) of one respectively\par
equal to two sides (DE, DF) of the other, but the contained angle (BAC) of\par
one greater than the contained angle (EDF) of the other, the base of that which\par
has the greater angle is greater than the base of the other.\par
Dem.\emdash Of the two sides AB,\par
AC, let AB be the one which is not\par
the greater, and with it make the\par
angle BAG equal to EDF [xxiii.].\par
Then because AB is not greater\par
than AC, AG is less than AC [xix.,\par
Exer. 6]. Produce AG to H, and\par
make AH equal to DF or AC [iii.].\par
Join BH, CH.\par
In the triangles BAH, EDF, we\par
have AB equal to DE (hyp.), AH\par
equal to DF (const.), and the angle\par
BAH equal to the angle EDF (const.); therefore the base [iv.] BH is equal to\par
EF. Again, because AH is equal to AC (const.), the triangle ACH is isosceles;\par
therefore the angle ACH is equal to AHC [v.]; but ACH is greater than BCH;\par
therefore AHC is greater than BCH: much more is the angle BHC greater than\par
BCH, and the greater angle is subtended by the greater side [xix.]. Therefore\par
BC is greater than BH; but BH has been proved to be equal to EF; therefore\par
BC is greater than EF.\par
The concluding part of this Proposition may be proved without joining CH, thus:\emdash\par
BG + GH > BH [xx.],\par
AG + GC > AC [xx.];\par
therefore BC + AH > BH + AC;\par
but AH = AC (const.);\par
therefore BC is > BH.\par
Or thus: Bisect the angle CAH by AO. Join OH. Now in the 4s CAO, HAO we have\par
the sides CA, AO in one equal to the sides AH, AO in the other, and the contained angles\par
equal; therefore the base OC is equal to the base OH [iv.]: to each add BO, and we have BC\par
equal to the sum of BO, OH; but the sum of BO, OH is greater than BH [xx.]. Therefore\par
BC is greater than BH, that is, greater than EF.\par
25\par
Exercises.\par
1. Prove this Proposition by making the angle ABH to the left of AB.\par
2. Prove that the angle BCA is greater than EF D.\par
PROP. XXV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (ABC, DEF) have two sides (AB, AC) of one respectively\par
equal to two sides (DE, DF) of the other, but the base (BC) of one greater\par
than the base (EF) of the other, the angle (A) contained by the sides of that\par
which has the greater base is greater them the angle (D) contained by the sides\par
of the other.\par
Dem.\emdash If the angle A be not\par
greater than D, it must be either\par
equal to it or less than it. We\par
shall examine each case:\emdash\par
1. If A were equal to D, the\par
triangles ABC, DEF would have\par
the two sides AB, AC of one respectively equal to the two sides\par
DE, DF of the other, and the angle A contained by the two sides\par
of one equal to the angle D contained by the two sides of the other. Hence [iv.]\par
BC would be equal to EF; but BC is, by hypothesis, greater than EF; hence\par
the angle A is not equal to the angle D.\par
2. If A were less than D, then D would be greater than A, and the triangles\par
DEF, ABC would have the two sides DE, DF of one respectively equal to the\par
two sides AB, AC of the other, and the angle D contained by the two sides of\par
one greater than the angle A contained by the two sides of the other. Hence\par
[xxiv.] EF would be greater than BC; but EF (hyp.) is not greater than BC.\par
Therefore A is not less than D, and we have proved that it is not equal to it;\par
therefore it must be greater.\par
Or thus, directly: Construct\par
the triangle ACG, whose three\par
sides AG, GC, CA shall be respectively equal to the three sides\par
DE, EF, F D of the triangle\par
DEF [xxii.]. Join BG. Then\par
because BC is greater than EF,\par
BC is greater than CG. Hence\par
[xviii.] the angle BGC is greater\par
than GBC; and make (xxiii.)\par
the angle BGH equal to GBH, and join AH. Then [vi.] BH is equal to\par
GH. Therefore the triangles ABH, AGH have the sides AB, AH of one equal\par
to the sides AG, AH of the other, and the base BH equal to GH. Therefore\par
[viii.] the angle BAH is equal to GAH. Hence the angle BAC is greater than\par
CAG, and therefore greater than EDF.\par
26\par
Exercise.\par
Demonstrate this Proposition directly by cutting off from BC a part equal to EF.\par
PROP. XXVI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (ABC, DEF) have two angles (B, C) of one equal respectively to two angles (E, F) of the other, and a side of one equal to a side\par
similarly placed with respect to the equal angles of the other, the triangles are\par
equal in every respect.\par
Dem.\emdash This Proposition breaks up into two according as the sides given to\par
be equal are the sides adjacent to the equal angles, namely BC and EF, or\par
those opposite equal angles.\par
1. Let the equal sides be BC and EF;\par
then if DE be not equal to AB, suppose GE\par
to be equal to it. Join GF; then the triangles\par
ABC, GEF have the sides AB, BC of one\par
respectively equal to the sides GE, EF of the\par
other, and the angle ABC equal to the angle\par
GEF (hyp.); therefore [iv.] the angle ACB is\par
equal to the angle GF E; but the angle ACB\par
is (hyp.) equal to DF E; hence GF E is equal\par
to DF E\emdash a part equal to the whole, which is absurd; therefore AB and DE are\par
not unequal, that is, they are equal. Consequently the triangles ABC, DEF\par
have the sides AB, BC of one respectively equal to the sides DE, EF of the\par
other; and the contained angles ABC and DEF equal; therefore [iv.] AC is\par
equal to DF, and the angle BAC is equal to the angle EDF.\par
2. Let the sides given to be equal be\par
AB and DE; it is required to prove that\par
BC is equal to EF, and AC to DF. If\par
BC be not equal to EF, suppose BG to\par
be equal to it. Join AG. Then the triangles ABG, DEF have the two sides AB,\par
BG of one respectively equal to the two\par
sides DE, EF of the other, and the angle\par
ABG equal to the angle DEF; therefore\par
[iv.] the angle AGB is equal to DF E; but the angle ACB is equal to DF E\par
(hyp.). Hence (Axiom i.) the angle AGB is equal to ACB, that is, the exterior\par
angle of the triangle ACG is equal to the interior and non-adjacent angle, which\par
[xvi.] is impossible. Hence BC must be equal to EF, and the same as in 1, AC\par
is equal to DF, and the angle BAC is equal to the angle EDF.\par
This Proposition, together with iv. and viii., includes all the cases of the congruence of\par
two triangles. Part I. may be proved immediately by superposition. For it is evident if ABC\par
be applied to DEF, so that the point B shall coincide with E, and the line BC with EF,\par
since BC is equal to EF, the point C shall coincide with F; and since the angles B, C are\par
27\par
respectively equal to the angles E, F, the lines BA, CA shall coincide with ED and F D.\par
Hence the triangles are congruent.\par
Def.\emdash If every point on a geometrical figure satisfies an assigned condition,\par
that figure is called the locus of the point satisfying the condition. Thus, for\par
example, a circle is the locus of a point whose distance from the centre is equal\par
to its radius.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The extremities of the base of an isosceles triangle are equally distant from any point\par
in the perpendicular from the vertical angle on the base.\par
2. If the line which bisects the vertical angle of a triangle also bisects the base, the triangle\par
is isosceles.\par
3. The locus of a point which is equally distant from two fixed lines is the pair of lines\par
which bisect the angles made by the fixed lines.\par
4. In a given right line find a point such that the perpendiculars from it on two given lines\par
may be equal. State also the number of solutions.\par
5. If two right-angled triangles have equal hypotenuses, and an acute angle of one equal\par
to an acute angle of the other, they are congruent.\par
6. If two right-angled triangles have equal hypotenuses, and a side of one equal to a side\par
of the other, they are congruent.\par
7. The bisectors of the three internal angles of a triangle are concurrent.\par
8. The bisectors of two external angles and the bisector of the third internal angle are\par
concurrent.\par
9. Through a given point draw a right line, such that perpendiculars on it from two given\par
points on opposite sides may be equal to each other.\par
10. Through a given point draw a right line intersecting two given lines, and forming an\par
isosceles triangle with them.\par
Parallel Lines.\par
Def. i.\emdash If two right lines in the same plane be such that, when produced\par
indefinitely, they do not meet at any finite distance, they are said to be parallel.\par
Def. ii.\emdash A parallelogram is a quadrilateral, both pairs of whose opposite\par
sides are parallel.\par
Def. iii.\emdash The right line joining either pair of opposite angles of a quadrilateral is called a diagonal.\par
Def. iv.\emdash If both pairs of opposite sides of a quadrilateral be produced to\par
meet, the right line joining their points of intersection is called its third diagonal.\par
Def. v.\emdash A quadrilateral which has one pair of opposite sides parallel is\par
called a trapezium.\par
Def. vi.\emdash If from the extremities of one right\par
line perpendiculars be drawn to another, the intercept between their feet is called the projection of the\par
first line on the second.\par
Def. vii.\emdash When a right line intersects two\par
other right lines in two distinct points it makes\par
with them eight angles, which have received special names in relation to one another. Thus, in the\par
28\par
figure\emdash 1, 2; 7, 8 are called exterior angles; 3, 4; 5, 6, interior angles. Again,\par
4; 6; 3, 5 are called alternate angles; lastly, 1, 5; 2, 6; 3, 8; 4, 7 are called\par
corresponding angles.\par
PROP. XXVII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a right line (EF) intersecting two right lines (AB, CD) makes the alternate\par
angles (AEF, EF D) equal to each other, these lines are parallel.\par
Dem.\emdash If AB and CD are not parallel they must meet, if produced, at some\par
finite distance: if possible let them meet\par
in G; then the figure EGF is a triangle,\par
and the angle AEF is an exterior angle,\par
and EF D a non-adjacent interior angle.\par
Hence [xvi.] AEF is greater than EF D;\par
but it is also equal to it (hyp.), that is, both equal and greater, which is absurd.\par
Hence AB and CD are parallel.\par
Or thus: Bisect EF in O; turn the whole figure round O as a centre, so that\par
EF shall fall on itself; then because OE = OF, the point E shall fall on F; and\par
because the angle AEF is equal to the angle EF D, the line EA will occupy\par
the place of F D, and the line F D the place of EA; therefore the lines AB, CD\par
interchange places, and the figure is symmetrical with respect to the point O.\par
Hence, if AB, CD meet on one side of O, they must also meet on the other\par
side; but two right lines cannot enclose a space (Axiom x.); therefore they do\par
not meet at either side. Hence they are parallel.\par
PROP. XXVIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a right line (EF) intersecting two right lines (AB, CD) makes the exterior\par
angle (EGB) equal to its corresponding interior angle (GHD), or makes two\par
interior angles (BGH, GHD) on the same side equal to two right angles, the\par
two right lines are parallel.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Since the lines AB, EF intersect, the angle AGH is equal to EGB [xv.];\par
but EGB is equal to GHD (hyp.); therefore\par
AGH is equal to GHD, and they are alternate\par
angles. Hence [xxvii.] AB is parallel to CD.\par
2. Since AGH and BGH are adjacent angles, their sum is equal to two right angles\par
[xiii.]; but the sum of BGH and GHD is two\par
right angles (hyp.); therefore rejecting the angle BGH we have AGH equal\par
GHD, and they are alternate angles; therefore AB is parallel to CD [xxvii.].\par
29\par
PROP. XXIX.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a right line (EF) intersect two parallel right lines (AB, CD), it makes\emdash\par
1. the alternate angles (AGH, GHD) equal to one another; 2. the exterior angle\par
(EGB) equal to the corresponding interior angle (GHD); 3. the two interior\par
angles (BGH, GHD) on the same side equal to two right angles.\par
Dem.\emdash If the angle AGH be not equal to\par
GHD, one must be greater than the other. Let\par
AGH be the greater; to each add BGH, and\par
we have the sum of the angles AGH, BGH\par
greater than the sum of the angles BGH,\par
GHD; but the sum of AGH, BGH is two right\par
angles; therefore the sum of BGH, GHD is\par
less than two right angles, and therefore (Axiom xii.) the lines AB, CD, if produced, will meet at some finite distance: but\par
since they are parallel (hyp.) they cannot meet at any finite distance. Hence\par
the angle AGH is not unequal to GHD\emdash that is, it is equal to it.\par
2. Since the angle EGB is equal to AGH [xv.], and GHD is equal to AGH\par
(1), EGB is equal to GHD (Axiom i.).\par
3. Since AGH is equal to GHD (1), add HGB to each, and we have the sum\par
of the angles AGH, HGB equal to the sum of the angles GHD, HGB; but the\par
sum of the angles AGH, HGB [xiii.] is two right angles; therefore the sum of\par
the angles BGH, GHD is two right angles.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Demonstrate both parts of Prop. xxviii. without using Prop. xxvii.\par
2. The parts of all perpendiculars to two parallel lines intercepted between them are equal.\par
3. If ACD, BCD be adjacent angles, any parallel to AB will meet the bisectors of these\par
angles in points equally distant from where it meets CD.\par
4. If through the middle point O of any right line terminated by two parallel right lines\par
any other secant be drawn, the intercept on this line made by the parallels is bisected in O.\par
5. Two right lines passing through a point equidistant from two parallels intercept equal\par
portions on the parallels.\par
6. The perimeter of the parallelogram, formed by drawing parallels to two sides of an\par
equilateral triangle from any point in the third side, is equal to twice the side.\par
7. If the opposite sides of a hexagon be equal and parallel, its diagonals are concurrent.\par
8. If two intersecting right lines be respectively parallel to two others, the angle between\par
the former is equal to the angle between the latter. For if AB, AC be respectively parallel to\par
DE, DF, and if AC, DE meet in G, the angles A, D are each equal to G [xxix.].\par
PROP. XXX.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two right lines (AB, CD) be parallel to the same right line (EF), they are\par
parallel to one another.\par
30\par
Dem.\emdash Draw any secant GHK. Then since\par
AB and EF are parallel, the angle AGH is equal\par
to GHF [xxix.]. In like manner the angle GHF\par
is equal to HKD [xxix.]. Therefore the angle\par
AGK is equal to the angle GKD (Axiom i.).\par
Hence [xxvii.] AB is parallel to CD.\par
PROP. XXXI.\emdash Problem.\par
Through a given point (C) to draw a right line parallel to a given right line.\par
Sol.\emdash Take any point D in AB. Join CD\par
(Post. i.), and make the angle DCE equal to the\par
angle ADC [xxiii.]. The line CE is parallel to\par
AB [xxvii.].\par
Exercises.\par
1. Given the altitude of a triangle and the base angles, construct it.\par
2. From a given point draw to a given line a line making with it an angle equal to a given\par
angle. Show that there will be two solutions.\par
3. Prove the following construction for trisecting a given line AB:\emdash On AB describe an\par
equilateral 4 ABC. Bisect the angles A, B by the lines AD, BD, meeting in D; through D\par
draw parallels to AC, BC, meeting AB in E, F: E, F are the points of trisection of AB.\par
4. Inscribe a square in a given equilateral triangle, having its base on a given side of the\par
triangle.\par
5. Draw a line parallel to the base of a triangle so that it may be\emdash 1. equal to the intercept\par
it makes on one of the sides from the extremity of the base; 2. equal to the sum of the two\par
intercepts on the sides from the extremities of the base; 3. equal to their difference. Show\par
that there are two solutions in each case.\par
6. Through two given points in two parallel lines draw two lines forming a lozenge with\par
the given parallels.\par
7. Between two lines given in position place a line of given length which shall be parallel\par
to a given line. Show that there are two solutions.\par
PROP. XXXII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If any side (AB) of a triangle (ABC) be\par
produced (to D), the external angle (CBD)\par
is equal to the sum of the two internal nonadjacent angles (A, C), and the sum of the\par
three internal angles is equal to two right angles.\par
Dem.\emdash Draw BE parallel to AC [xxxi.].\par
Now since BC intersects the parallels BE,\par
AC, the alternate angles EBC, ACB are\par
equal [xxix.]. Again, since AB intersects the parallels BE, AC, the angle\par
EBD is equal to BAC [xxix.]; hence the whole angle CBD is equal to the sum\par
31\par
of the two angles ACB, BAC: to each of these add the angle ABC and we\par
have the sum of CBD, ABC equal to the sum of the three angles ACB, BAC,\par
ABC: but the sum of CBD, ABC is two right angles [xiii.]; hence the sum of\par
the three angles ACB, BAC, ABC is two right angles.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If a right-angled triangle be isosceles, each base angle is half a right\par
angle.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If two triangles have two angles in one respectively equal to two\par
angles in the other, their remaining angles are equal.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash Since a quadrilateral can be divided into two triangles, the sum of\par
its angles is equal to four right angles.\par
Cor. 4.\emdash If a figure of n sides be divided into triangles by drawing diagonals\par
from any one of its angles there will be (n \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 2) triangles; hence the sum of its\par
angles is equal 2(n \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 2) right angles.\par
Cor. 5.\f1\emdash If all the sides of any convex polygon be produced, the sum of the\par
external angles is equal to four right angles.\par
Cor. 6.\emdash Each angle of an equilateral triangle is two-thirds of a right angle.\par
Cor. 7.\emdash If one angle of a triangle be equal to the sum of the other two, it\par
is a right angle.\par
Cor. 8.\emdash Every right-angled triangle can be divided into two isosceles triangles by a line drawn from the right angle to the hypotenuse.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Trisect a right angle.\par
2. Any angle of a triangle is obtuse, right, or acute, according as the opposite side is\par
greater than, equal to, or less than, twice the median drawn from that angle.\par
3. If the sides of a polygon of n sides be produced, the sum of the angles between each\par
alternate pair is equal to 2(n \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 4) right angles.\par
4. If the line which bisects the external vertical angle be parallel to the base, the triangle\par
is isosceles.\par
5. If two right-angled 4s ABC, ABD be on the same hypotenuse AB, and the vertices\par
C and D be joined, the pair of angles subtended by any side of the quadrilateral thus formed\par
are equal.\par
6. The three perpendiculars of a triangle are concurrent.\par
7. The bisectors of two adjacent angles of a parallelogram are at right angles.\par
8. The bisectors of the external angles of a quadrilateral form a circumscribed quadrilateral, the sum of whose opposite angles is equal to two right angles.\par
9. If the three sides of one triangle be respectively perpendicular to those of another\par
triangle, the triangles are equiangular.\par
10. Construct a right-angled triangle, being given the hypotenuse and the sum or difference\par
of the sides.\par
11. The angles made with the base of an isosceles triangle by perpendiculars from its\par
extremities on the equal sides are each equal to half the vertical angle.\par
12. The angle included between the internal bisector of one base angle of a triangle and\par
the external bisector of the other base angle is equal to half the vertical angle.\par
13. In the construction of Prop. xviii. prove that the angle DBC is equal to half the\par
difference of the base angles.\par
14. If A, B, C denote the angles of a 4, prove that 1\par
2\par
(A + B), 1\par
2\par
(B + C), 1\par
2\par
(C + A) will\par
be the angles of a 4 formed by any side and the bisectors of the external angles between that\par
side and the other sides produced.\par
32\par
PROP. XXXIII.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
The right lines (AC, BD) which join the adjacent extremities of two equal and\par
parallel right lines (AB, CD) are equal and parallel.\par
Dem.\emdash Join BC. Now since AB is parallel to CD, and BC intersects them, the angle ABC is equal to the alternate angle DCB\par
[xxix.]. Again, since AB is equal to CD, and\par
BC common, the triangles ABC, DCB have\par
the sides AB, BC in one respectively equal to\par
the sides DC, CB in the other, and the angles\par
ABC, DCB contained by those sides equal;\par
therefore [iv.] the base AC is equal to the base\par
BD, and the angle ACB is equal to the angle CBD; but these are alternate\par
angles; hence [xxvii.] AC is parallel to BD, and it has been proved equal to it.\par
Therefore AC is both equal and parallel to BD.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If two right lines AB, BC be respectively equal and parallel to two other right lines\par
DE, EF, the right line AC joining the extremities of the former pair is equal to the right line\par
DF joining the extremities of the latter.\par
2. Right lines that are equal and parallel have equal projections on any other right line;\par
and conversely, parallel right lines that have equal projections on another right line are equal.\par
3. Equal right lines that have equal projections on another right line are parallel.\par
4. The right lines which join transversely the extremities of two equal and parallel right\par
lines bisect each other.\par
PROP. XXXIV.\emdash Theorem.\par
The opposite sides (AB, CD; AC, BD) and the opposite angles (A, D;\par
B, C) of a parallelogram are equal to one another, and either diagonal bisects\par
the parallelogram.\par
Dem.\emdash Join BC. Since AB is parallel to\par
CD, and BC intersects them, the angle ABC\par
is equal to the angle BCD [xxix.]. Again,\par
since BC intersects the parallels AC, BD, the\par
angle ACB is equal to the angle CBD; hence\par
the triangles ABC, DCB have the two angles\par
ABC, ACB in one respectively equal to the\par
two angles BCD, CBD in the other, and the\par
side BC common. Therefore [xxvi.] AB is equal to CD, and AC to BD; the\par
angle BAC to the angle BDC, and the triangle ABC to the triangle BDC.\par
Again, because the angle ACB is equal to CBD, and DCB equal to ABC,\par
the whole angle ACD is equal to the whole angle ABD.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If one angle of a parallelogram be a right angle, all its angles are\par
right angles.\par
33\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If two adjacent sides of a parallelogram be equal, it is a lozenge.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash If both pairs of opposite sides of a quadrilateral be equal, it is a\par
parallelogram.\par
Cor. 4.\emdash If both pairs of opposite angles of a quadrilateral be equal, it is a\par
parallelogram.\par
Cor. 5.\emdash If the diagonals of a quadrilateral bisect each other, it is a parallelogram.\par
Cor. 6.\emdash If both diagonals of a quadrilateral bisect the quadrilateral, it is a\par
parallelogram.\par
Cor. 7.\emdash If the adjacent sides of a parallelogram be equal, its diagonals bisect\par
its angles.\par
Cor. 8.\emdash If the adjacent sides of a parallelogram be equal, its diagonals\par
intersect at right angles.\par
Cor. 9.\emdash In a right-angled parallelogram the diagonals are equal.\par
Cor. 10.\emdash If the diagonals of a parallelogram be perpendicular to each other,\par
it is a lozenge.\par
Cor. 11.\emdash If a diagonal of a parallelogram bisect the angles whose vertices\par
it joins, the parallelogram is a lozenge.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other.\par
2. If the diagonals of a parallelogram be equal, all its angles are right angles.\par
3. Divide a right line into any number of equal parts.\par
4. The right lines joining the adjacent extremities of two unequal parallel right lines will\par
meet, if produced, on the side of the shorter parallel.\par
5. If two opposite sides of a quadrilateral be parallel but not equal, and the other pair\par
equal but not parallel, its opposite angles are supplemental.\par
6. Construct a triangle, being given the middle points of its three sides.\par
7. The area of a quadrilateral is equal to the area of a triangle, having two sides equal to\par
its diagonals, and the contained angle equal to that between the diagonals.\par
PROP. XXXV.\emdash Theorem.\par
Parallelograms on the same base (BC) and between the same parallels are\par
equal.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let the sides AD, DF\par
of the parallelograms AC, BF opposite to the common base BC terminate in the same point D, then\par
[xxxiv.] each parallelogram is double of the triangle BCD. Hence they\par
are equal to one another.\par
2. Let the sides AD, EF (figures\par
(\f3\lang1032\'e1), (\'e2)) opposite to BC not terminate in the same point.\par
34\par
Then because ABCD is a parallelogram, AD is equal to BC [xxxiv.]; and\par
since BCEF is a parallelogram, EF is equal to BC; therefore (see fig. (\'e1))\par
take away ED, and in fig. (\'e2) add ED, and we have in each case AE equal to\par
DF, and BA is equal to CD [xxxiv.]. Hence the triangles BAE, CDF have\par
the two sides BA, AE in one respectively equal to the two sides CD, DF in\par
the other, and the angle BAE [xxix.] equal to the angle CDF; hence [iv.] the\par
triangle BAE is equal to the triangle CDF; and taking each of these triangles\par
in succession from the quadrilateral BAF C, there will remain the parallelogram\par
BCF E equal to the parallelogram BCDA.\par
Or thus: The triangles ABE, DCF have [xxxiv.] the sides AB, BE in\par
one respectively equal to the sides DC, CF in the other, and the angle ABE\par
equal to the angle DCF [xxix., Ex. 8]. Hence the triangle ABE is equal to the\par
triangle DCF; and, taking each away from the quadrilateral BAF C, there will\par
remain the parallelogram BCF E equal to the parallelogram BCDA.\par
Observation.\f1\emdash By the second method of proof the subdivision of the demonstration into\par
cases is avoided. It is easy to see that either of the two parallelograms ABCD, EBCF can be\par
divided into parts and rearranged so as to make it congruent with the other. This Proposition\par
affords the first instance in the Elements in which equality which is not congruence occurs.\par
This equality is expressed algebraically by the symbol =, while congruence is denoted by \f2\u8801?\f0 ,\par
called also the symbol of identity. Figures that are congruent are said to be identically equal.\par
PROP. XXXVI.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
Parallelograms (BD, FH) on equal bases (BC, F G) and between the same\par
parallels are equal.\par
Dem.\emdash Join BE, CH. Now\par
since F H is a parallelogram, F G\par
is equal to EH [xxxiv.]; but BC\par
is equal to F G (hyp.); therefore\par
BC is equal to EH (Axiom i.).\par
Hence BE, CH, which join their\par
adjacent extremities, are equal\par
and parallel; therefore BH is a\par
parallelogram. Again, since the parallelograms BD, BH are on the same base\par
BC, and between the same parallels BC, AH, they are equal [xxxv.]. In like\par
manner, since the parallelograms HB, HF are on the same base EH, and between the same parallels EH, BG, they are equal. Hence BD and F H are each\par
equal to BH. Therefore (Axiom i.) BD is equal to F H.\par
35\par
Exercise.\emdash Prove this Proposition without joining BE, CH.\par
PROP. XXXVII.\emdash Theorem.\par
Triangles (ABC, DBC) on the same base (BC) and between the same\par
parallels (AD, BC) are equal.\par
Dem.\emdash Produce AD both\par
ways. Draw BE parallel to\par
AC, and CF parallel to BD\par
[xxxi.] Then the figures AEBC,\par
DBCF are parallelograms; and\par
since they are on the same base\par
BC, and between the same parallels BC, EF they are equal\par
[xxxv.]. Again, the triangle ABC is half the parallelogram AEBC [xxxiv.],\par
because the diagonal AB bisects it. In like manner the triangle DBC is half\par
the parallelogram DBCF, because the diagonal DC bisects it, and halves of\par
equal things are equal (Axiom vii.). Therefore the triangle ABC is equal to the\par
triangle DBC.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If two equal triangles be on the same base, but on opposite sides, the right line joining\par
their vertices is bisected by the base.\par
2. Construct a triangle equal in area to a given quadrilateral figure.\par
3. Construct a triangle equal in area to a given rectilineal figure.\par
4. Construct a lozenge equal to a given parallelogram, and having a given side of the\par
parallelogram for base.\par
5. Given the base and the area of a triangle, find the locus of the vertex.\par
6. If through a point O, in the production of the diagonal AC of a parallelogram ABCD,\par
any right line be drawn cutting the sides AB, BC in the points E, F, and ED, F D be joined,\par
the triangle EF D is less than half the parallelogram.\par
PROP. XXXVIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
Two triangles on equal bases and between the same parallels are equal.\par
Dem.\emdash By a construction similar to the last, we see that the triangles are\par
the halves of parallelograms, on equal bases, and between the same parallels.\par
Hence they are the halves of equal parallelograms [xxxvi.]. Therefore they are\par
equal to one another.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Every median of a triangle bisects the triangle.\par
2. If two triangles have two sides of one respectively equal to two sides of the other, and\par
the contained angles supplemental, their areas are equal.\par
36\par
3. If the base of a triangle be divided into any number of equal parts, right lines drawn\par
from the vertex to the points of division will divide the whole triangle into as many equal\par
parts.\par
4. Right lines from any point in the diagonal of a parallelogram to the angular points\par
through which the diagonal does not pass, and the diagonal, divide the parallelogram into\par
four triangles which are equal, two by two.\par
5. If one diagonal of a quadrilateral bisects the other, it also bisects the quadrilateral, and\par
conversely.\par
6. If two 4s ABC, ABD be on the same base AB, and between the same parallels, and\par
if a parallel to AB meet the sides AC, BC in the point E, F; and the sides AD, BD in the\par
point G, H; then EF = GH.\par
7. If instead of triangles on the same base we have triangles on equal bases and between\par
the same parallels, the intercepts made by the sides of the triangles on any parallel to the\par
bases are equal.\par
8. If the middle points of any two sides of a triangle be joined, the triangle so formed with\par
the two half sides is one-fourth of the whole.\par
9. The triangle whose vertices are the middle points of two sides, and any point in the\par
base of another triangle, is one-fourth of that triangle.\par
10. Bisect a given triangle by a right line drawn from a given point in one of the sides.\par
11. Trisect a given triangle by three right lines drawn from a given point within it.\par
12. Prove that any right line through the intersection of the diagonals of a parallelogram\par
bisects the parallelogram.\par
13. The triangle formed by joining the middle point of one of the non-parallel sides of a\par
trapezium to the extremities of the opposite side is equal to half the trapezium.\par
PROP. XXXIX.\emdash Theorem.\par
Equal triangles (BAC, BDC) on the same base (BC) and on the same side of\par
it are between the same parallels.\par
Dem.\emdash Join AD. Then if AD be not parallel to BC, let AE be parallel to it, and let\par
it cut BD in E. Join EC. Now since the triangles BEC, BAC are on the same base BC,\par
and between the same parallels BC, AE, they\par
are equal [xxxvii.]; but the triangle BAC is\par
equal to the triangle BDC (hyp.). Therefore\par
(Axiom i.) the triangle BEC is equal to the\par
triangle BDC\emdash that is, a part equal to the whole which is absurd. Hence AD\par
must be parallel to BC.\par
PROP. XL.\emdash Theorem.\par
Equal triangles (ABC, DEF) on equal bases (BC, EF) which form parts\par
of the same right line, and on the same side of the line, are between the same\par
parallels.\par
37\par
Dem.\emdash Join AD. If AD be not\par
parallel to BF, let AG be parallel\par
to it. Join GF. Now since the triangles GEF and ABC are on equal\par
bases BC, EF, and between the same\par
parallels BF, AG, they are equal\par
[xxxviii.]; but the triangle DEF is\par
equal to the triangle ABC (hyp.). Hence GEF is equal to DEF (Axiom i.)\emdash\par
that is, a part equal to the whole, which is absurd. Therefore AD must be\par
parallel to BF.\par
Def.\emdash The altitude of a triangle is the perpendicular from the vertex on the\par
base.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Triangles and parallelograms of equal bases and altitudes are respectively equal.\par
2. The right line joining the middle points of two sides of a triangle is parallel to the\par
third; for the medians from the extremities of the base to these points will each bisect the\par
original triangle. Hence the two triangles whose base is the third side and whose vertices are\par
the points of bisection are equal.\par
3. The parallel to any side of a triangle through the middle point of another bisects the\par
third.\par
4. The lines of connexion of the middle points of the sides of a triangle divide it into four\par
congruent triangles.\par
5. The line of connexion of the middle points of two sides of a triangle is equal to half the\par
third side.\par
6. The middle points of the four sides of a convex quadrilateral, taken in order, are the\par
angular points of a parallelogram whose area is equal to half the area of the quadrilateral.\par
7. The sum of the two parallel sides of a trapezium is double the line joining the middle\par
points of the two remaining sides.\par
8. The parallelogram formed by the line of connexion of the middle points of two sides of\par
a triangle, and any pair of parallels drawn through the same points to meet the third side, is\par
equal to half the triangle.\par
9. The right line joining the middle points of opposite sides of a quadrilateral, and the\par
right line joining the middle points of its diagonals, are concurrent.\par
PROP. XLI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a parallelogram (ABCD) and a triangle (EBC) be on the same base (BC)\par
and between the same parallels, the parallelogram is double of the triangle.\par
Dem.\emdash Join AC. The parallelogram\par
ABCD is double of the triangle ABC [xxxiv.];\par
but the triangle ABC is equal to the triangle EBC [xxxvii.]. Therefore the parallelogram\par
ABCD is double of the triangle EBC.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If a triangle and a parallelogram\par
have equal altitudes, and if the base of the triangle be double of the base of the parallelogram,\par
the areas are equal.\par
38\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The sum of the triangles whose bases are two opposite sides of\par
a parallelogram, and which have any point between these sides as a common\par
vertex, is equal to half the parallelogram.\par
PROP. XLII.\emdash Problem.\par
To construct a parallelogram equal to a given triangle (ABC), and having an\par
angle equal to a given angle (D).\par
Sol.\emdash Bisect AB in E. Join EC. Make the angle BEF [xxiii.] equal to D.\par
Draw CG parallel to AB [xxxi.], and BG parallel to EF. EG is a parallelogram\par
fulfilling the required conditions.\par
Dem.\emdash Because AE is equal to EB (const.), the triangle AEC is equal\par
to the triangle EBC [xxxviii.], therefore the triangle ABC is double of the\par
triangle EBC; but the parallelogram EG is also double of the triangle EBC\par
[xli.], because they are on the same base EB, and between the same parallels\par
EB and CG. Therefore the parallelogram EG is equal to the triangle ABC,\par
and it has (const.) the angle BEF equal to D. Hence EG is a parallelogram\par
fulfilling the required conditions.\par
PROP. XLIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
The parallels (EF, GH) through any\par
point (K) in one of the diagonals (AC) of\par
a parallelogram divide it into four parallelograms, of which the two (BK, KD) through\par
which the diagonal does not pass, and which\par
are called the complements of the other\par
two, are equal.\par
Dem.\emdash Because the diagonal bisects the\par
parallelograms AC, AK, KC we have [xxxiv.] the triangle ADC equal to the\par
triangle ABC, the triangle AHK equal to AEK, and the triangle KF C equal\par
to the triangle KGC. Hence, subtracting the sums of the two last equalities\par
from the first, we get the parallelogram DK equal to the parallelogram KB.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If through a point K within a parallelogram ABCD lines drawn\par
parallel to the sides make the parallelograms DK, KB equal, K is a point in\par
the diagonal AC.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The parallelogram BH is equal to AF, and BF to HC.\par
Cor. 2. supplies an easy demonstration of a fundamental Proposition in Statics.\par
39\par
Exercises.\par
1. If EF, GH be parallels to the adjacent sides of a parallelogram ABCD, the diagonals EH, GF of two of the four s into\par
which they divide it and one of the diagonals\par
of ABCD are concurrent.\par
Dem.\emdash Let EH, GF meet in M;\par
through M draw MP, MJ parallel to AB,\par
BC. Produce AD, GH, BC to meet MP,\par
and AB, EF, DC to meet MJ. Now the\par
complement OF = F J: to each add the\par
F L, and we get the figure OF L = CJ.\par
Again, the complement P H = HK [xliii.]:\par
to each add the OC, and we get the\par
P C = figure OF L. Hence the P C = CJ. Therefore they are about the same diagonal [xliii., Cor. 1]. Hence AC produced will pass through M.\par
2. The middle points of the three diagonals AC, BD, EF of a quadrilateral ABCD are\par
collinear.\par
Dem.\emdash Complete the AEBG. Draw DH, CI parallel to AG, BG. Join IH, and\par
produce; then AB, CD, IH are concurrent (Ex. 1); therefore IH will pass through F. Join\par
EI, EH. Now [xi., Ex. 2, 3] the middle points of EI, EH, EF are collinear, but [xxxiv.,\par
Ex. 1] the middle points of EI, EH are the middle points of AC, BD. Hence the middle\par
points of AC, BD, EF are collinear.\par
PROP. XLIV.\emdash Problem.\par
To a given, right line (AB) to apply a parallelogram which shall be equal to\par
a given triangle (C), and have one of its angles equal to a given angle (D).\par
40\par
Sol.\emdash Construct the parallelogram BEF G [xlii.] equal to the given triangle\par
C, and having the angle B equal to the given angle D, and so that its side BE\par
shall be in the same right line with AB. Through A draw AH parallel to BG\par
[xxxi.], and produce F G to meet it in H. Join HB. Then because HA and F E\par
are parallels, and HF intersects them, the sum of the angles AHF, HF E is two\par
right angles [xxix.]; therefore the sum of the angles BHF, HF E is less than\par
two right angles; and therefore (Axiom xii.) the lines HB, F E, if produced,\par
will meet as at K. Through K draw KL parallel to AB [xxxi.], and produce\par
HA and GB to meet it in the points L and M. Then AM is a parallelogram\par
fulfilling the required conditions.\par
Dem.\emdash The parallelogram AM is equal to GE [xliii.]; but GE is equal to\par
the triangle C (const.); therefore AM is equal to the triangle C. Again, the\par
angle ABM is equal to EBG [xv.], and EBG is equal to D (const.); therefore\par
the angle ABM is equal to D; and AM is constructed on the given line; therefore\par
it is the parallelogram required.\par
PROP. XLV.\emdash Problem.\par
To construct a parallelogram equal to a given rectilineal figure (ABCD), and\par
having an angle equal to a given rectilineal angle (X).\par
Sol.\emdash Join BD. Construct a parallelogram EG [xlii.] equal to the triangle\par
ABD, and having the angle E equal to the given angle X; and to the right line\par
GH apply the parallelogram HI equal to the triangle BCD, and having the\par
angle GHK equal to X [xliv.], and so on for additional triangles if there be\par
any. Then EI is a parallelogram fulfilling the required conditions.\par
41\par
Dem.\emdash Because the angles GHK, F EH are each equal to X (const.), they\par
are equal to one another: to each add the angle GHE, and we have the sum\par
of the angles GHK, GHE equal to the sum of the angles F EH, GHE; but\par
since HG is parallel to EF, and EH intersects them, the sum of F EH, GHE\par
is two right angles [xxix.]. Hence the sum of GHK, GHE is two right angles;\par
therefore EH, HK are in the same right line [xiv.].\par
Again, because GH intersects the parallels F G, EK, the alternate angles\par
F GH, GHK are equal [xxix.]: to each add the angle HGI, and we have the\par
sum of the angles F GH, HGI equal to the sum of the angles GHK, HGI; but\par
since GI is parallel to HK, and GH intersects them, the sum of the angles\par
GHK, HGI is equal to two right angles [xxix.]. Hence the sum of the angles\par
F GH, HGI is two right angles; therefore F G and GI are in the same right line\par
[xiv.].\par
Again, because EG and HI are parallelograms, EF and KI are each parallel\par
to GH; hence [xxx.] EF is parallel to KI, and the opposite sides EK and F I\par
are parallel; therefore EI is a parallelogram; and because the parallelogram EG\par
(const.) is equal to the triangle ABD, and HI to the triangle BCD, the whole\par
parallelogram EI is equal to the rectilineal figure ABCD, and it has the angle\par
E equal to the given angle X. Hence EI is a parallelogram fulfilling the required\par
conditions.\par
It would simplify Problems xliv., xlv., if they were stated as the constructing of rectangles, and in this special form they would be better understood by the student, since rectangles\par
are the simplest areas to which others are referred.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Construct a rectangle equal to the sum of two or any number of rectilineal figures.\par
2. Construct a rectangle equal to the difference of two given figures.\par
PROP. XLVI.\emdash Problem.\par
On a given right line (AB) to describe a square.\par
Sol.\emdash Erect AD at right angles to AB [xi.], and make\par
it equal to AB [iii.]. Through D draw DC parallel to AB\par
[xxxi.], and through B draw BC parallel to AD; then\par
AC is the square required.\par
Dem.\emdash Because AC is a parallelogram, AB is equal\par
to CD [xxxiv.]; but AB is equal to AD (const.); therefore AD is equal to CD, and AD is equal to BC [xxxiv.].\par
Hence the four sides are equal; therefore AC is a lozenge,\par
and the angle A is a right angle. Therefore AC is a\par
square (Def. xxx.).\par
42\par
Exercises.\par
1. The squares on equal lines are equal; and, conversely, the sides of equal squares are\par
equal.\par
2. The parallelograms about the diagonal of a square are squares.\par
3. If on the four sides of a square, or on the sides produced, points be taken equidistant\par
from the four angles, they will be the angular points of another square, and similarly for a\par
regular pentagon, hexagon, &c.\par
4. Divide a given square into five equal parts; namely, four right-angled triangles, and a\par
square.\par
PROP. XLVII.\emdash Theorem.\par
In a right-angled triangle (ABC) the square on the hypotenuse (AB) is equal\par
to the sum of the squares on the other two sides (AC, BC).\par
Dem.\emdash On the sides AB, BC,\par
CA describe squares [xlvi.]. Draw\par
CL parallel to AG. Join CG, BK.\par
Then because the angle ACB is right\par
(hyp.), and ACH is right, being the\par
angle of a square, the sum of the angles ACB, ACH is two right angles;\par
therefore BC, CH are in the same\par
right line [xiv.]. In like manner AC,\par
CD are in the same right line. Again,\par
because BAG is the angle of a square\par
it is a right angle: in like manner\par
CAK is a right angle. Hence BAG\par
is equal to CAK: to each add BAC,\par
and we get the angle CAG equal to\par
KAB. Again, since BG and CK are squares, BA is equal to AG, and CA to\par
AK. Hence the two triangles CAG, KAB have the sides CA, AG in one respectively equal to the sides KA, AB in the other, and the contained angles CAG,\par
KAB also equal. Therefore [iv.] the triangles are equal; but the parallelogram\par
AL is double of the triangle CAG [xli.], because they are on the same base AG,\par
and between the same parallels AG and CL. In like manner the parallelogram\par
AH is double of the triangle KAB, because they are on the same base AK, and\par
between the same parallels AK and BH; and since doubles of equal things are\par
equal (Axiom vi.), the parallelogram AL is equal to AH. In like manner it can\par
be proved that the parallelogram BL is equal to BD. Hence the whole square\par
AF is equal to the sum of the two squares AH and BD.\par
43\par
Or thus: Let all the squares be made in reversed directions. Join CG, BK, and through C draw OL parallel\par
to AG. Now, taking the \f2\u8736?\f0 BAC from the right \f2\u8736?\f0 s BAG,\par
CAK, the remaining \f2\u8736?\f0 s CAG, BAK are equal. Hence the\par
4s CAG, BAK have the side CA = AK, and AG = AB,\par
and the \f2\u8736?\f0 CAG = BAK; therefore [iv.] they are equal; and\par
since [xli.] the s AL, AH are respectively the doubles of\par
these triangles, they are equal. In like manner the s BL,\par
BD are equal; hence the whole square AF is equal to the\par
sum of the two squares AH, BD.\par
This proof is shorter than the usual one, since it is not\par
necessary to prove that AC, CD are in one right line. In a\par
similar way the Proposition may be proved by taking any of\par
the eight figures formed by turning the squares in all possible\par
directions. Another simplification of the proof would be got\par
by considering that the point A is such that one of the 4s CAG, BAK can be turned round\par
it in its own plane until it coincides with the other; and hence that they are congruent.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The square on AC is equal to the rectangle AB . AO, and the square on BC = AB . BO.\par
2. The square on CO = AO . OB.\par
3. AC2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 BC2 = AO2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 BO2\par
.\par
4. Find a line whose square shall be equal to the sum of two given squares.\par
5. Given the base of a triangle and the difference of the squares of its sides, the locus of\par
its vertex is a right line perpendicular to the base.\par
6. The transverse lines BK, CG are perpendicular to each other.\par
7. If EG be joined, its square is equal to AC2 + 4BC2\par
.\par
8. The square described on the sum of the sides of a right-angled triangle exceeds the\par
square on the hypotenuse by four times the area of the triangle (see fig., xlvi., Ex. 3). More\par
generally, if the vertical angle of a triangle be equal to the angle of a regular polygon of n\par
sides, then the regular polygon of n sides, described on a line equal to the sum of its sides,\par
exceeds the area of the regular polygon of n sides described on the base by n times the area\par
of the triangle.\par
9. If AC and BK intersect in P, and through P a line be drawn parallel to BC, meeting\par
AB in Q; then CP is equal to P Q.\par
10. Each of the triangles AGK and BEF, formed by joining adjacent corners of the\par
squares, is equal to the right-angled triangle ABC.\par
11. Find a line whose square shall be equal to the difference of the squares on two lines.\par
12. The square on the difference of the sides AC, CB is less than the square on the\par
hypotenuse by four times the area of the triangle.\par
13. If AE be joined, the lines AE, BK, CL, are concurrent.\par
14. In an equilateral triangle, three times the square on any side is equal to four times the\par
square on the perpendicular to it from the opposite vertex.\par
15. On BE, a part of the side BC of a square ABCD, is described the square BEF G,\par
having its side BG in the continuation of AB; it is required to divide the figure AGF ECD\par
into three parts which will form a square.\par
16. Four times the sum of the squares on the medians which bisect the sides of a rightangled triangle is equal to five times the square on the hypotenuse.\par
17. If perpendiculars be let fall on the sides of a polygon from any point, dividing each\par
side into two segments, the sum of the squares on one set of alternate segments is equal to\par
the sum of the squares on the remaining set.\par
18. The sum of the squares on lines drawn from any point to one pair of opposite angles\par
of a rectangle is equal to the sum of the squares on the lines from the same point to the\par
remaining pair.\par
19. Divide the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle into two parts, such that the difference\par
between their squares shall be equal to the square on one of the sides.\par
44\par
20. From the extremities of the base of a triangle perpendiculars are let fall on the opposite\par
sides; prove that the sum of the rectangles contained by the sides and their lower segments is\par
equal to the square on the base.\par
PROP. XLVIII.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If the square on one side (AB) of a triangle be equal to the sum of the squares\par
on the remaining sides (AC, CB), the angle (C) opposite to that side is a right\par
angle.\par
Dem.\emdash Erect CD at right angles to CB [xi.], and\par
make CD equal to CA [iii.]. Join BD. Then because\par
AC is equal to CD, the square on AC is equal to the\par
square on CD: to each add the square on CB, and\par
we have the sum of the squares on AC, CB equal\par
to the sum of the squares on CD, CB; but the sum\par
of the squares on AC, CB is equal to the square on\par
AB (hyp.), and the sum of the squares on CD, CB\par
is equal to the square on BD [xlvii.]. Therefore the\par
square on AB is equal to the square on BD. Hence AB is equal to BD [xlvi.,\par
Ex. 1]. Again, because AC is equal to CD (const.), and CB common to the\par
two triangles ACB, DCB, and the base AB equal to the base DB, the angle\par
ACB is equal to the angle DCB; but the angle DCB is a right angle (const.).\par
Hence the angle ACB is a right angle.\par
The foregoing proof forms an exception to Euclid\rquote s\par
demonstrations of converse propositions, for it is direct.\par
The following is an indirect proof:\emdash If CB be not at right\par
angles to AC, let CD be perpendicular to it. Make CD =\par
CB. Join AD. Then, as before, it can be proved that AD\par
is equal to AB, and CD is equal to CB (const.). This is\par
contrary to Prop. vii. Hence the angle ACB is a right\par
angle.\par
Questions for Examination on Book I.\par
1. What is Geometry?\par
2. What is geometric magnitude? Ans. That which has extension in space.\par
3. Name the primary concepts of geometry. Ans. Points, lines, surfaces, and solids.\par
4. How may lines be divided? Ans. Into straight and curved.\par
5. How is a straight line generated? Ans. By the motion of a point which has the same\par
direction throughout.\par
6. How is a curved line generated? Ans. By the motion of a point which continually\par
changes its direction.\par
7. How may surfaces be divided? Ans. Into planes and curved surfaces.\par
8. How may a plane surface be generated. Ans. By the motion of a right line which crosses\par
another right line, and moves along it without changing its direction.\par
9. Why has a point no dimensions?\par
10. Why has a line neither breadth nor thickness?\par
11. How many dimensions has a surface?\par
12. What is Plane Geometry?\par
45\par
13. What portion of plane geometry forms the subject of the \ldblquote First Six Books of Euclid\rquote s\par
Elements\rdblquote ? Ans. The geometry of the point, line, and circle.\par
14. What is the subject-matter of Book I.?\par
15. How many conditions are necessary to fix the position of a point in a plane? Ans. Two;\par
for it must be the intersection of two lines, straight or curved.\par
16. Give examples taken from Book I.\par
17. In order to construct a line, how many conditions must be given? Ans. Two; as, for\par
instance, two points through which it must pass; or one point through which it must pass and\par
a line to which it must be parallel or perpendicular, &c.\par
18. What problems on the drawing of lines occur in Book I.? Ans. ii., ix., xi., xii., xxiii.,\par
xxxi., in each of which, except Problem 2, there are two conditions. The direction in Problem\par
2 is indeterminate.\par
19. How many conditions are required in order to describe a circle? Ans. Three; as, for\par
instance, the position of the centre (which depends on two conditions) and the length of the\par
radius (compare Post. iii.).\par
20. How is a proposition proved indirectly? Ans. By proving that its contradictory is false.\par
21. What is meant by the obverse of a proposition?\par
22. What propositions in Book I. are the obverse respectively of Propositions iv., v., vi.,\par
xxvii.?\par
23. What proposition is an instance of the rule of identity?\par
24. What are congruent figures?\par
25. What other name is applied to them? Ans. They are said to be identically equal.\par
26. Mention all the instances of equality which are not congruence that occur in Book I.\par
27. What is the difference between the symbols denoting congruence and identity?\par
28. Classify the properties of triangles and parallelograms proved in Book I.\par
29. What proposition is the converse of Prop. xxvi., Part I.?\par
30. Define adjacent, exterior, interior, alternate angles respectively.\par
31. What is meant by the projection of one line on another?\par
32. What are meant by the medians of a triangle?\par
33. What is meant by the third diagonal of a quadrilateral?\par
34. Mention some propositions in Book I. which are particular cases of more general ones\par
that follow.\par
35. What is the sum of all the exterior angles of any rectilineal figure equal to?\par
36. How many conditions must be given in order to construct a triangle? Ans. Three;\par
such as the three sides, or two sides and an angle, &c.\par
Exercises on Book I.\par
1. Any triangle is equal to the fourth part of that which is formed by drawing through\par
each vertex a line parallel to its opposite side.\par
2. The three perpendiculars of the first triangle in question 1 are the perpendiculars at\par
the middle points of the sides of the second triangle.\par
3. Through a given point draw a line so that the portion intercepted by the legs of a given\par
angle may be bisected in the point.\par
4. The three medians of a triangle are concurrent.\par
5. The medians of a triangle divide each other in the ratio of 2 : 1.\par
6. Construct a triangle, being given two sides and the median of the third side.\par
7. In every triangle the sum of the medians is less than the perimeter, and greater than\par
three-fourths of the perimeter.\par
8. Construct a triangle, being given a side and the two medians of the remaining sides.\par
9. Construct a triangle, being given the three medians.\par
10. The angle included between the perpendicular from the vertical angle of a triangle\par
on the base, and the bisector of the vertical angle, is equal to half the difference of the base\par
angles.\par
11. Find in two parallels two points which shall be equidistant from a given point, and\par
whose line of connexion shall be parallel to a given line.\par
12. Construct a parallelogram, being given two diagonals and a side.\par
46\par
13. The smallest median of a triangle corresponds to the greatest side.\par
14. Find in two parallels two points subtending a right angle at a given point and equally\par
distant from it.\par
15. The sum of the distances of any point in the base of an isosceles triangle from the\par
equal sides is equal to the distance of either extremity of the base from the opposite side.\par
16. The three perpendiculars at the middle points of the sides of a triangle are concurrent.\par
Hence prove that perpendiculars from the vertices on the opposite sides are concurrent [see\par
Ex. 2].\par
17. Inscribe a lozenge in a triangle having for an angle one angle of the triangle.\par
18. Inscribe a square in a triangle having its base on a side of the triangle.\par
19. Find the locus of a point, the sum or the difference of whose distance from two fixed\par
lines is equal to a given length.\par
20. The sum of the perpendiculars from any point in the interior of an equilateral triangle\par
is equal to the perpendicular from any vertex on the opposite side.\par
21. The distance of the foot of the perpendicular from either extremity of the base of a\par
triangle on the bisector of the vertical angle, from the middle point of the base, is equal to\par
half the difference of the sides.\par
22. In the same case, if the bisector of the external vertical angle be taken, the distance\par
will be equal to half the sum of the sides.\par
23. Find a point in one of the sides of a triangle such that the sum of the intercepts made\par
by the other sides, on parallels drawn from the same point to these sides, may be equal to a\par
given length.\par
24. If two angles have their legs respectively parallel, their bisectors are either parallel or\par
perpendicular.\par
25. If lines be drawn from the extremities of the base of a triangle to the feet of perpendiculars let fall from the same points on either bisector of the vertical angle, these lines meet\par
on the other bisector of the vertical angle.\par
26. The perpendiculars of a triangle are the bisectors of the angles of the triangle whose\par
vertices are the feet of these perpendiculars.\par
27. Inscribe in a given triangle a parallelogram whose diagonals shall intersect in a given\par
point.\par
28. Construct a quadrilateral, the four sides being given in magnitude, and the middle\par
points of two opposite sides being given in position.\par
29. The bases of two or more triangles having a common vertex are given, both in magnitude and position, and the sum of the areas is given; prove that the locus of the vertex is a\par
right line.\par
30. If the sum of the perpendiculars let fall from a given point on the sides of a given\par
rectilineal figure be given, the locus of the point is a right line.\par
31. ABC is an isosceles triangle whose equal sides are AB, AC; B0C0\par
is any secant cutting\par
the equal sides in B0\par
, C0\par
, so that AB0 + AC0 = AB + AC: prove that B0C0\par
is greater than\par
BC.\par
32. A, B are two given points, and P is a point in a given line L; prove that the difference\par
of AP and P B is a maximum when L bisects the angle AP B; and that their sum is a minimum\par
if it bisects the supplement.\par
33. Bisect a quadrilateral by a right line drawn from one of its angular points.\par
34. AD and BC are two parallel lines cut obliquely by AB, and perpendicularly by AC;\par
and between these lines we draw BED, cutting AC in E, such that ED = 2AB; prove that\par
the angle DBC is one-third of ABC.\par
35. If O be the point of concurrence of the bisectors of the angles of the triangle ABC,\par
and if AO produced meet BC in D, and from O, OE be drawn perpendicular to BC; prove\par
that the angle BOD is equal to the angle COE.\par
36. If the exterior angles of a triangle be bisected, the three external triangles formed on\par
the sides of the original triangle are equiangular.\par
37. The angle made by the bisectors of two consecutive angles of a convex quadrilateral\par
is equal to half the sum of the remaining angles; and the angle made by the bisectors of two\par
opposite angles is equal to half the difference of the two other angles.\par
47\par
38. If in the construction of the figure, Proposition xlvii., EF, KG be joined,\par
EF2 + KG2 = 5AB2\par
.\par
39. Given the middle points of the sides of a convex polygon of an odd number of sides,\par
construct the polygon.\par
40. Trisect a quadrilateral by lines drawn from one of its angles.\par
41. Given the base of a triangle in magnitude and position and the sum of the sides; prove\par
that the perpendicular at either extremity of the base to the adjacent side, and the external\par
bisector of the vertical angle, meet on a given line perpendicular to the base.\par
42. The bisectors of the angles of a convex quadrilateral form a quadrilateral whose opposite angles are supplemental. If the first quadrilateral be a parallelogram, the second is a\par
rectangle; if the first be a rectangle, the second is a square.\par
43. The middle points of the sides AB, BC, CA of a triangle are respectively D, E, F; DG\par
is drawn parallel to BF to meet EF; prove that the sides of the triangle DCG are respectively\par
equal to the three medians of the triangle ABC.\par
44. Find the path of a billiard ball started from a given point which, after being reflected\par
from the four sides of the table, will pass through another given point.\par
45. If two lines bisecting two angles of a triangle and terminated by the opposite sides be\par
equal, the triangle is isosceles.\par
46. State and prove the Proposition corresponding to Exercise 41, when the base and\par
difference of the sides are given.\par
47. If a square be inscribed in a triangle, the rectangle under its side and the sum of the\par
base and altitude is equal to twice the area of the triangle.\par
48. If AB, AC be equal sides of an isosceles triangle, and if BD be a perpendicular on\par
AC; prove that BC2 = 2AC . CD.\par
49. The sum of the equilateral triangles described on the legs of a right-angled triangle is\par
equal to the equilateral triangle described on the hypotenuse.\par
50. Given the base of a triangle, the difference of the base angles, and the sum or difference\par
of the sides; construct it.\par
51. Given the base of a triangle, the median that bisects the base, and the area; construct\par
it.\par
52. If the diagonals AC, BD of a quadrilateral ABCD intersect in E, and be bisected in\par
the points F, G, then\par
4 4 EF G = (AEB + ECD) \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 (AED + EBC).\par
53. If squares be described on the sides of any triangle, the lines of connexion of the adjacent corners are respectively\f1\emdash (1) the doubles of the medians of the triangle; (2) perpendicular\par
to them.\par
48\par
BOOK II.\par
THEORY OF RECTANGLES\par
Every Proposition in the Second Book has either a square or a rectangle in\par
its enunciation. Before commencing it the student should read the following\par
preliminary explanations: by their assistance it will be seen that this Book,\par
which is usually considered difficult, will be rendered not only easy, but almost\par
intuitively evident.\par
1. As the linear unit is that by which we express all linear measures, so the square unit is\par
that to which all superficial measures are referred. Again, as there are different linear units\par
in use, such as in this country, inches, feet, yards, miles, &c., and in France, metres, and their\par
multiples or sub-multiples, so different square units are employed.\par
2. A square unit is the square described on a line whose length is the linear unit. Thus\par
a square inch is the square described on a line whose length is an inch; a square foot is the\par
square described on a line whose length is a foot, &c.\par
3. If we take a linear foot, describe a square on it, divide two adjacent sides each into\par
twelve equal parts, and draw parallels to the sides, we evidently divide the square foot into\par
square inches; and as there will manifestly be 12 rectangular parallelograms, each containing\par
12 square inches, the square foot contains 144 square inches.\par
In the same manner it can be shown that a square yard contains 9 square feet; and so in\par
general the square described on any line contains n\par
2\par
times the square described on the n\par
th\par
part of the line. Thus, as a simple case, the square on a line is four times the square on its\par
half. On account of this property the second power of a quantity is called its square; and,\par
conversely, the square on a line AB is expressed symbolically by AB2\par
.\par
4. If a rectangular parallelogram be such that two adjacent sides contain respectively m\par
and n linear units, by dividing one side into m and the other into n equal parts, and drawing\par
parallels to the sides, the whole area is evidently divided into mn square units. Hence the area\par
of the parallelogram is found by multiplying its length by its breadth, and this explains why\par
we say (see Def. iv.) a rectangle is contained by any two adjacent sides; for if we multiply the\par
length of one by the length of the other we have the area. Thus, if AB, AD be two adjacent\par
sides of a rectangle, the rectangle is expressed by AB . AD.\par
Definitions.\par
i. If a point C be taken in a line AB, the\par
parts AC, CB are called segments, and C a point\par
of division.\par
ii. If C be taken in the line AB produced,\par
AC, CB are still called the segments of the\par
line AB; but C is called a point of external division.\par
iii. A parallelogram whose angles are right angles is called a rectangle.\par
iv. A rectangle is said to be contained by\par
any two adjacent sides. Thus the rectangle\par
ABCD is said to be contained by AB, AD, or\par
by AB, BC, &c.\par
v. The rectangle contained by two separate lines such as AB and CD is the parallelogram formed by erecting a perpendicular to\par
49\par
AB, at A, equal to CD, and drawing parallels:\par
the area of the rectangle will be AB . CD.\par
vi. In any parallelogram the figure which\par
is composed of either of the parallelograms\par
about a diagonal and the two complements\par
[see I., xliii.] is called a gnomon. Thus, if we\par
take away either of the parallelograms AO,\par
OC from the parallelogram AC, the remainder is called a gnomon.\par
PROP. I.\emdash Theorem.\par
If there be two lines (A, BC), one of which is divided into any number of\par
parts (BD, DE, EC), the rectangle contained by the two lines (A, BC), is\par
equal to the sum of the rectangles contained by the undivided line (A) and the\par
several parts of the divided line.\par
Dem.\emdash Erect BF at right angles to BC [I., xi.] and make it\par
equal to A. Complete the parallelogram BK (Def. v.). Through D,\par
E draw DG, EH parallel to BF.\par
Because the angles at B, D, E are\par
right angles, each of the quadrilaterals BG, DH, EK is a rectangle.\par
Again, since A is equal to BF (const.), the rectangle contained by A and BC\par
is the rectangle contained by BF and BC (Def. v.); but BK is the rectangle\par
contained by BF and BC. Hence the rectangle contained by A and BC is BK.\par
In like manner the rectangle contained by A and BD is BG. Again, since A is\par
equal to BF (const.), and BF is equal to DG [I. xxxiv.], A is equal to DG.\par
Hence the rectangle contained by A and DE is the figure DH (Def. v.). In like\par
manner the rectangle contained by A and EC is the figure EK. Hence we have\par
the following identities:\emdash\par
Rectangle contained by A and BD \f2\u8801?\f1  \f0 BG.\par
,, ,, A ,, DE \f2\u8801?\f1  \f0 DH.\par
,, ,, A ,, EC \f2\u8801?\f1  \f0 EK.\par
,, ,, A ,, BC \f2\u8801?\f1  \f0 BK.\par
But BK is equal to the sum of BG, DH, EK (I., Axiom ix.). Therefore the\par
rectangle contained by A and BC is equal to the sum of the rectangles contained\par
by A and BD, A and DE, A and EC.\par
If we denote the lines BD, DE, EC by a, b, c, the Proposition asserts that the rectangle\par
contained by A, and a + b + c is equal to the sum of the rectangles contained by A and a, A\par
50\par
and b, A and c, or, as it may be written, A(a + b + c) = Aa + Ab + Ac. This corresponds to\par
the distributive law in multiplication, and shows that rectangles in Geometry, and products\par
in Arithmetic and Algebra, are subject to the same rules.\par
Illustration.\f1\emdash Suppose A to be 6 inches; BD, 5 inches; DE, 4 inches; EC, 3 inches; then\par
BC will be 12 inches; and the rectangles will have the following values:\emdash\par
Rectangle A . BC = 6 \f0\'d7 12 = 72 square inches.\par
,, A . BD = 6 \'d7 5 = 30 ,,\par
,, A . DE = 6 \'d7 4 = 24 ,,\par
,, A . EC = 6 \'d7 3 = 18 ,,\par
Now the sum of the three last rectangles, viz. 30, 24, 18, is 72. Hence the rectangle\par
A . BC = A . BD + A . DE + A . EC.\par
The Second Book is occupied with the relations between the segments of a\par
line divided in various ways. All these can be proved in the most simple manner by Algebraic Multiplication. We recommend the student to make himself\par
acquainted with the proofs by this method as well as with those of Euclid. He\par
will thus better understand the meaning of each Proposition.\par
Cor. 1.\f1\emdash The rectangle contained by a line and the difference of two others\par
is equal to the difference of the rectangles contained by the line and each of the\par
others.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The area of a triangle is equal to half the rectangle contained by its\par
base and perpendicular.\par
Dem.\emdash From the vertex C let fall the perpendicular CD. Draw EF parallel to AB, and\par
AE, BF each parallel to CD. Then AF is the\par
rectangle contained by AB and BF; but BF is\par
equal to CD. Hence AF = AB . CD; but [I. xli.]\par
the triangle ABC is = half the parallelogram AF.\par
Therefore the triangle ABC is =\par
1\par
2AB . CD.\par
PROP. II.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) be divided into any two parts (at C), the square on the whole\par
line is equal to the sum of the rectangles contained by the whole and each of the\par
segments (AC, CB).\par
Dem.\emdash On AB describe the square ABDF\par
[I. xlvi.], and through C draw CE parallel to AF\par
[I. xxxi.]. Now, since AB is equal to AF, the rectangle contained by AB and AC is equal to the rectangle\par
contained by AF and AC; but AE is the rectangle\par
contained by AF and AC. Hence the rectangle contained by AB and AC is equal to AE. In like manner\par
the rectangle contained by AB and CB is equal to the\par
figure CD. Therefore the sum of the two rectangles\par
AB . AC, AB . CB is equal to the square on AB.\par
Or thus: AB = AC + CB,\par
and AB = AB.\par
Hence, multiplying, we get AB2 = AB . AC + AB . CB.\par
51\par
This Proposition is the particular case of i. when the divided and undivided lines are\par
equal, hence it does not require a separate Demonstration.\par
PROP. III.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) be divided into two segments (at C), the rectangle contained\par
by the whole line and either segment (CB) is equal to the square on that segment\par
together with the rectangle contained by the segments.\par
Dem.\emdash On BC describe the square BCDE\par
[I. xlvi.]. Through A draw AF parallel to CD:\par
produce ED to meet AF in F. Now since CB\par
is equal to CD, the rectangle contained by AC,\par
CB is equal to the rectangle contained by AC,\par
CD; but the rectangle contained by AC, CD is\par
the figure AD. Hence the rectangle AC . CB is equal to the figure AD, and the\par
square on CB is the figure CE. Hence the rectangle AC . CB, together with\par
the square on CB, is equal to the figure AE.\par
Again, since CB is equal to BE, the rectangle AB . CB is equal to the\par
rectangle AB . BE; but the rectangle AB . BE is equal to the figure AE. Hence\par
the rectangle AB . CB is equal to the figure AE. And since things which are\par
equal to the same are equal to one another, the rectangle AC . CB, together with\par
the square on CB, is equal to the rectangle AB . CB.\par
Or thus: AB = AC + CB,\par
CB = CB.\par
Hence AB . CB = AC . CB + CB2\par
.\par
Prop. iii. is the particular case of Prop. i., when the undivided line is equal to a segment\par
of the divided line.\par
PROP. IV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) be divided into any two parts (at C), the square on the whole\par
line is equal to the sum of the squares on the parts (AC, CB), together with\par
twice their rectangle.\par
Dem.\emdash On AB describe a square ABDE. Join\par
EB; through C draw CF parallel to AE, intersecting\par
BE in G; and through G draw HI parallel to AB.\par
Now since AE is equal to AB, the angle ABE\par
is equal to AEB [I. v.]; but since BE intersects the\par
parallels AE, CF, the angle AEB is equal to CGB\par
[I. xxix.]. Hence the angle CBG is equal to CGB,\par
and therefore [I. vi.] CG is equal to CB; but CG is\par
equal to BI and CB to GI. Hence the figure CBIG\par
is a lozenge, and the angle CBI is right. Hence (I., Def. xxx.) it is a square.\par
In like manner the figure EF GH is a square.\par
52\par
Again, since CB is equal to CG, the rectangle AC . CB is equal to the\par
rectangle AC . CG; but AC . CG is the figure AG (Def. iv.). Therefore the\par
rectangle AC . CB is equal to the figure AG. Now the figures AG, GD are\par
equal [I. xliii.], being the complements about the diagonal of the parallelogram\par
AD. Hence the parallelograms AG, GD are together equal to twice the rectangle\par
AC . CB. Again, the figure HF is the square on HG, and HG is equal to AC.\par
Therefore HF is equal to the square on AC, and CI is the square on CB; but\par
the whole figure AD, which is the square on AB, is the sum of the four figures\par
HF, CI, AG, GD. Therefore the square on AB is equal to the sum of the\par
squares on AC, CB, and twice the rectangle AC . CB.\par
Or thus: On AB describe the square ABDE, and cut off\par
AH, EG, DF each equal to CB. Join CF, F G, GH, HC. Now\par
the four 4s ACH, CBF, F DG, GEH are evidently equal;\par
therefore their sum is equal to four times the 4ACH; but the\par
4ACH is half the rectangle AC . AH (i. Cor. 2)\emdash that is, equal\par
to half the rectangle AC . CB. Therefore the sum of the four\par
triangles is equal to 2AC . CB.\par
Again, the figure CF GH is a square [I. xlvi., Cor. 3], and\par
equal to AC2 + AH2\par
[I. xlvii.]\emdash that is, equal to AC2 + CB2\par
.\par
Hence the whole figure ABDE = AC2 + CB2 + 2AC . CB.\par
Or thus: AB = AC + CB.\par
Squaring, we get AB2 =AC2 + 2AC . CB + CB2\par
.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The parallelograms about the diagonal of a square are squares.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The square on a line is equal to four\par
times the square on its half.\par
For let AB = 2AC, then AB2 = 4AC2\par
.\par
This Cor. may be proved by the First Book\par
thus: Erect CD at right angles to AB, and make\par
CD = AC or CB. Join AD, DB.\par
Then AD2 = AC2 + CD2 = 2AC2\par
In like manner, DB2 = 2CB2\par
;\par
therefore AD2 + DB2 = 2AC2 + 2CB2 = 4AC2\par
.\par
But since the angle ADB is right, AD2 + DB2 = AB2\par
;\par
therefore AB2 = 4AC2\par
.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash If a line be divided into any number of parts, the square on the\par
whole is equal to the sum of the squares on all the parts, together with twice the\par
sum of the rectangles contained by the several distinct pairs of parts.\par
53\par
Exercises.\par
1. Prove Proposition iv. by using Propositions ii. and iii.\par
2. If from the vertical angle of a right-angled triangle a perpendicular be let fall on the\par
hypotenuse, its square is equal to the rectangle contained by the segments of the hypotenuse.\par
3. From the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle portions are cut off equal to the adjacent\par
sides; prove that the square on the middle segment is equal to twice the rectangle contained\par
by the extreme segments.\par
4. In any right-angled triangle the square on the sum of the hypotenuse and perpendicular,\par
from the right angle on the hypotenuse, exceeds the square on the sum of the sides by the\par
square on the perpendicular.\par
5. The square on the perimeter of a right-angled triangle is equal to twice the rectangle\par
contained by the sum of the hypotenuse and one side, and the sum of the hypotenuse and the\par
other side.\par
PROP. V.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) be divided into two equal parts (at C), and also into two\par
unequal parts (at D), the rectangle (AD . DB) contained by the unequal parts,\par
together with the square on the part (CD) between the points of section, is equal\par
to the square on half the line.\par
Dem.\emdash On CB describe the square\par
CBEF [I. xlvi.]. Join BF. Through D\par
draw DG parallel to CF, meeting BF in\par
H. Through H draw KM parallel to AB,\par
and through A draw AK parallel to CL\par
[I. xxxi.].\par
The parallelogram CM is equal to DE\par
[I. xliii., Cor. 2]; but AL is equal to CM [I. xxxvi.], because they are on equal\par
bases AC, CB, and between the same parallels; therefore AL is equal to DE:\par
to each add CH, and we get the parallelogram AH equal to the gnomon CMG;\par
but AH is equal to the rectangle AD . DH, and therefore equal to the rectangle\par
AD . DB, since DH is equal to DB [iv., Cor. 1]; therefore the rectangle AD . DB\par
is equal to the gnomon CMG, and the square on CD is equal to the figure LG.\par
Hence the rectangle AD . DB, together with the square on CD, is equal to the\par
whole figure CBEF\emdash that is, to the square on CB.\par
Or thus: AD = AC + CD = BC + CD;\par
DB = BC \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CD;\par
therefore AD . BD = (BC + CD)(BC \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CD) = BC2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CD2\par
.\par
Hence AD . BD + CD2 = BC2\par
.\par
Cor. 1.\f1\emdash The rectangle AD . DB is the rectangle contained by the sum of the\par
lines AC, CD and their difference; and we have proved it equal to the difference\par
between the square on AC and the square on CD. Hence the difference of the\par
54\par
squares on two lines is equal to the rectangle contained by their sum and their\par
difference.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The perimeter of the rectangle AH is equal to 2AB, and is therefore\par
independent of the position of the point D on the line AB; and the area of the\par
same rectangle is less than the square on half the line by the square on the\par
segment between D and the middle point of the line; therefore, when D is the\par
middle point, the rectangle will have the maximum area. Hence, of all rectangles\par
having the same perimeter, the square has the greatest area.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Divide a given line so that the rectangle contained by its parts may have a maximum\par
area.\par
2. Divide a given line so that the rectangle contained by its segments may be equal to a\par
given square, not exceeding the square on half the given line.\par
3. The rectangle contained by the sum and the difference of two sides of a triangle is equal\par
to the rectangle contained by the base and the difference of the segments of the base, made\par
by the perpendicular from the vertex.\par
4. The difference of the sides of a triangle is less than the difference of the segments of\par
the base, made by the perpendicular from the vertex.\par
5. The difference between the square on one of the equal sides of an isosceles triangle, and\par
the square on any line drawn from the vertex to a point in the base, is equal to the rectangle\par
contained by the segments of the base.\par
6. The square on either side of a right-angled triangle is equal to the rectangle contained\par
by the sum and the difference of the hypotenuse and the other side.\par
PROP. VI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) be bisected (at C), and divided externally in any point (D),\par
the rectangle (AD . BD) contained by the segments made by the external point,\par
together with the square on half the line, is equal to the square on the segment\par
between the middle point and the point of external division.\par
Dem.\emdash On CD describe the square\par
CDF E [I. xlvi.], and join DE; through\par
B draw BHG parallel to CE [I. xxxi.],\par
meeting DE in H; through H draw KLM\par
parallel to AD; and through A draw AK\par
parallel to CL. Then because AC is equal\par
to CB, the rectangle AL is equal to CH\par
[I. xxxvi.]; but the complements CH, HF\par
are equal [I. xliii.]; therefore AL is equal\par
to HF. To each of these equals add CM and LG, and we get AM and LG\par
equal to the square CDF E; but AM is equal to the rectangle AD . DM, and\par
therefore equal to the rectangle AD . DB, since DB is equal to DM; also LG\par
is equal to the square on CB, and CDF E is the square on CD. Hence the\par
rectangle AD . DB, together with the square on CB, it equal to the square on\par
CD.\par
55\par
Or thus:\emdash\par
Dem.\emdash On CB describe the square\par
CBEF [I. xlvi.]. Join BF. Through D\par
draw DG parallel to CF, meeting F B produced in H. Through H draw KM parallel\par
to AB. Through A draw AK parallel A to\par
CL [I. xxxi.].\par
The parallelogram CM is equal to DE\par
[I. xliii.]; but AL is equal to CM [I. xxxvi.],\par
because they are on equal bases AC, CB, and\par
between the same parallels; therefore AL is equal to DE. To each add CH, and\par
we get the parallelogram AH equal to the gnomon CMG; but AH is equal\par
to the rectangle AD . DH, and therefore equal to the rectangle AD . DB, since\par
DH is equal to DB [iv., Cor. 1]; therefore the rectangle AD . DB is equal to\par
the gnomon CMG, and the square on CB is the figure CE. Therefore the\par
rectangle AD . DB, together with the square on CB, is equal to the whole figure\par
LHGF\emdash that is, equal to the square on LH or to the square on CD.\par
Or thus: AD = AC + CD = CD + CB;\par
BD = CD \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CB.\par
Hence AD . DB = (CD + CB)(CD \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CB) = CD2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CB2\par
;\par
therefore AD . DB + CB2 = CD2\par
.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Show that Proposition vi. is reduced to Proposition v. by producing the line in the\par
opposite direction.\par
2. Divide a given line externally, so that the rectangle contained by its segments may be\par
equal to the square on a given line.\par
3. Given the difference of two lines and the rectangle contained by them; find the lines.\par
4. The rectangle contained by any two lines is equal to the square on half the sum, minus\par
the square on half the difference.\par
5. Given the sum or the difference of two lines and the difference of their squares; find the\par
lines.\par
6. If from the vertex C of an isosceles triangle a line CD be drawn to any point in the\par
base produced, prove that CD2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CB2 = AD . DB.\par
7. Give a common enunciation which will include Propositions v. and vi.\par
PROP. VII.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If a right line (AB) be divided into any two parts (at C), the sum of the\par
squares on the whole line (AB) and either segment (CB) is equal to twice the\par
rectangle (2AB . CB) contained by the whole line and that segment, together\par
with the square on the other segment.\par
56\par
Dem.\emdash On AB describe the square ABDE. Join\par
BE. Through C draw CG parallel to AE, intersecting\par
BE in F. Through F draw HK parallel to AB.\par
Now the square AD is equal to the three figures AK,\par
F D, and GH: to each add the square CK, and we have\par
the sum of the squares AD, CK equal to the sum of the\par
three figures AK, CD, GH; but CD is equal to AK;\par
therefore the sum of the squares AD, CK is equal to\par
twice the figure AK, together with the figure GH. Now AK is the rectangle\par
AB . BK; but BK is equal to BC; therefore AK is equal to the rectangle\par
AB . BC, and AD is the square on AB; CK the square on CB; and GH is the\par
square on HF, and therefore equal to the square on AC. Hence the sum of the\par
squares on AB and BC is equal to twice the rectangle AB . BC, together with\par
the square on AC.\par
Or thus: On AC describe the square ACDE. Produce\par
the sides CD, DE, EA, and make each produced part\par
equal to CB. Join BF, F G, GH, HB. Then the figure\par
BF GH is a square [I. xlvi., Ex. 3], and it is equal to the\par
square on AC, together with the four equal triangles HAB,\par
BCF, F DG, GEH. Now [I. xlvii.], the figure BF GH is\par
equal to the sum of the squares on AB, AH\emdash that is, equal\par
to the sum of the squares on AB, BC; and the sum of the\par
four triangles is equal to twice the rectangle AB . BC, for\par
each triangle is equal to half the rectangle AB . BC. Hence\par
the sum of the squares on AB, BC is equal to twice the\par
rectangle AB . BC, together with the square on AC.\par
Or thus: AC = AB \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 BC;\par
therefore AC2 = AB2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 2AB . BC + BC2\par
;\par
therefore AC2 + 2AB . BC = AB2 + BC2\par
.\par
Comparison of iv. and vii.\par
By iv., square on sum = sum of squares + twice rectangle.\par
By vii., square on difference = sum of squares-twice rectangle.\par
Cors. from iv. and vii.\par
1. Square on the sum, the sum of the squares, and the square on the difference\par
of any two lines, are in arithmetical progression.\par
2. Square on the sum + square on the difference of any two lines = twice\par
the sum of the squares on the lines (Props. ix. and x.).\par
3. The square on the sum \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 the square on the difference of any two lines =\par
four times the rectangle under lines (Prop. viii.).\par
PROP. VIII.\f1\endash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) be divided into two parts (at C), the square on the sum of the\par
whole line (AB) and either segment (BC) is equal to four times the rectangle\par
contained by the whole line (AB) and that segment, together with the square on\par
the other segment (AC).\par
57\par
Dem.\emdash Produce AB to D. Make BD equal to\par
BC. On AD describe the square AEF D [I. xlvi.].\par
Join DE. Through C, B draw CH, BL parallel to\par
AE [I. xxxi.], and through K, I draw MN, P O\par
parallel to AD.\par
Since CO is the square on CD, and CK the\par
square on CB, and CB is the half of CD, CO is\par
equal to four times CK [iv., Cor. 1]. Again, since\par
CG, GI are the sides of equal squares, they are equal [I. xlvi., Cor. 1]. Hence\par
the parallelogram AG is equal to MI [I. xxxvi.]. In like manner IL is equal\par
to JF; but MI is equal to IL [I. xliii.]. Therefore the four figures AG, MI,\par
IL, JF are all equal; hence their sum is equal to four times AG; and the square\par
CO has been proved to be equal to four times CK. Hence the gnomon AOH is\par
equal to four times the rectangle AK\emdash that is, equal to four times the rectangle\par
AB . BC, since BC is equal to BK.\par
Again, the figure P H is the square on P I, and therefore equal to the square\par
on AC. Hence the whole figure AF, that is, the square on AD, is equal to four\par
times the rectangle AB . BC, together with the square on AC.\par
Or thus: Produce BA to D, and make AD = BC. On DB\par
describe the square DBEF. Cut off BG, EI, F L each equal to\par
BC. Through A and I draw lines parallel to DF, and through\par
G and L, lines parallel to AB.\par
Now it is evident that the four rectangles. AG, GI, IL,\par
LA are all equal; but AG is the rectangle AB . BG or AB . BC.\par
Therefore the sum of the four rectangles is equal to 4AB . BC.\par
Again, the figure NP is evidently equal to the square on AC.\par
Hence the whole figure, which is the square on BD, or the\par
square on the sum of AB and BC, is equal to 4AB . BC + AC2\par
.\par
Or thus: AB + BC = AC + 2BC;\par
therefore (AB + BC)\par
2 = AC2 + 4AC . CB + 4BC2\par
= AC2 + 4(AC + CB) . CB\par
= AC2 + 4AB . BC.\par
Direct sequence from v. or vi.\par
Since by v. or vi. the rectangle contained by any two lines is = the square\par
on half their sum \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 the square on half their difference; therefore four times the\par
rectangle contained by any two lines = the square on their sum \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 the square\par
on their difference.\par
Direct sequence of viii. from iv. and vii.\par
By iv., the square on the sum = the sum of the squares + twice the rectangle.\par
By vii., the square on the difference = the sum of the squares \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 twice the\par
rectangle. Therefore, by subtraction, the square on the sum \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 the square on\par
the difference = four times the rectangle.\par
58\par
Exercises.\par
1. In the figure [I. xlvii.] if EF, GK be joined, prove EF2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CO2 = (AB + BO)\par
2\par
.\par
2. Prove GK2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 EF2 = 3AB(AO \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 BO).\par
3.1 Given the difference of two lines = R, and their rectangle = 4R2\par
; find the lines.\par
PROP. IX.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) be bisected (at C) and divided into two unequal parts (at D),\par
the sum of the squares on the unequal parts (AD, DB) is double the sum of the\par
squares on half the line (AC), and on the segment (CD) between the points of\par
section.\par
Dem.\emdash Erect CE at right angles to AB,\par
and make it equal to AC or CB. Join AE,\par
EB. Draw DF parallel to CE, and F G\par
parallel to CD. Join AF.\par
Because AC is equal to CE, and the angle ACE is right, the angle CEA is half\par
a right angle. In like manner the angles\par
CEB, CBE are half right angles; therefore\par
the whole angle AEF is right. Again, because GF is parallel to CB, and CE intersects them, the angle EGF is equal to\par
ECB; but ECB is right (const.); therefore EGF is right; and GEF has been\par
proved to be half a right angle; therefore the angle GF E is half a right angle [I.\par
xxxii.]. Therefore [I. vi.] GE is equal to GF. In like manner F D is equal to\par
DB.\par
Again, since AC is equal to CE, AC2\par
is equal to CE2\par
; but AE2\par
is equal to\par
AC2 +CE2\par
[I. xlvii.]. Therefore AE2\par
is equal to 2AC2\par
. In like manner EF2\par
is\par
equal to 2GF2 or 2CD2\par
. Therefore AE2 + EF2\par
is equal to 2AC2 + 2CD2\par
; but\par
AE2+EF2\par
is equal to AF2\par
[I. xlvii.]. Therefore AF2\par
is equal to 2AC2+2CD2\par
.\par
Again, since DF is equal to DB, DF2\par
is equal to DB2\par
: to each add AD2\par
,\par
and we get AD2 + DF2\par
equal to AD2 + DB2\par
; but AD2 + DF2\par
is equal to\par
AF2\par
; therefore AF2\par
is equal to AD2 + DB2\par
; and we have proved AF2\par
equal to\par
2AC2 + 2CD2\par
. Therefore AD2 + DB2\par
is equal to 2AC2 + 2CD2\par
.\par
Or thus: AD = AC + CD; DB = AC \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CD.\par
Square and add, and we get AD2 + DB2 = 2AC2 + 2CD2\par
.\par
1Ex. 3 occurs in the solution of the problem of the inscription of a regular polygon of\par
seventeen sides in a circle. See note C.\par
59\par
Exercises.\par
1. The sum of the squares on the segments of a line of given length is a minimum when\par
it is bisected.\par
2. Divide a given line internally, so that the sum of the squares on the parts may be equal\par
to a given square, and state the limitation to its possibility.\par
3. If a line AB be bisected in C and divided unequally in D,\par
AD2 + DB2 = 2AD . DB + 4CD2\par
.\par
4. Twice the square on the line joining any point in the hypotenuse of a right-angled\par
isosceles triangle to the vertex is equal to the sum of the squares on the segments of the\par
hypotenuse.\par
5. If a line be divided into any number of parts, the continued product of all the parts is\par
a maximum, and the sum of their squares is a minimum when all the parts are equal.\par
PROP. X.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) be bisected (at C) and divided externally (at D), the sum of\par
the squares on the segments (AD, DB) made by the external point is equal to\par
twice the square on half the line, and twice the square on the segment between\par
the points of section.\par
Dem.\emdash Erect CE at right angles to AB, and make it equal to\par
AC or CB. Join AE, EB. Draw\par
DF parallel to CE, and produce\par
EB. Now since DF is parallel to\par
EC, the angle BDF is = to BCE\par
[I. xxix.], and [I. xv.] the angle\par
DBF is = to EBC; but the sum of\par
the angles BCE, EBC is less than\par
two right angles [I. xvii.]; therefore\par
the sum of the angles BDF, DBF\par
is less than two right angles, and therefore [I., Axiom xii.] the lines EB, DF,\par
if produced, will meet. Let them meet in F. Through F draw F G parallel to\par
AB, and produce EC to meet it in G. Join AF.\par
Because AC is equal to CE, and the angle ACE is right, the angle CEA is\par
half a right angle. In like manner the angles CEB, CBE are half right angles;\par
therefore the whole angle AEF is right. Again, because GF is parallel to CB,\par
and GE intersects them, the angle EGF is equal to ECB [I. xxix.]; but ECB\par
is right (const.); therefore EGF is right, and GEF has been proved to be half\par
a right angle; therefore [I. xxxii.] GF E is half a right angle, and therefore [I.\par
vi.] GE is equal to GF. In like manner F D is equal to DB.\par
Again, since AC is equal to CE, AC2\par
is equal to CE2\par
; but AE2\par
is equal to\par
AC2 + CE2\par
[I. xlvii.]; therefore AE2\par
is equal to 2AC2\par
. In like manner EF2\par
is\par
equal to 2GF2 or 2CD2\par
; therefore AE2 + EF2\par
is equal to 2AC2 + 2CD2\par
; but\par
AE2+EF2\par
is equal to AF2\par
[I. xlvii.]. Therefore AF2\par
is equal to 2AC2+2CD2\par
.\par
Again, since DF is equal to DB, DF2\par
is equal to DB2\par
: to each add AD2\par
,\par
and we get AD2 + DF2\par
equal to AD2 + DB2\par
; but AD2 + DF2\par
is equal to\par
60\par
AF2\par
; therefore AF2\par
is equal to AD2 + DB2\par
; and AF2 has been proved equal\par
to 2AC2 + 2CD2\par
. Therefore AD2 + DB2\par
is equal to 2AC2 + 2CD2\par
.\par
Or thus: AD = CD + AC,\par
BD = CD \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 AC.\par
Square and add, and we get AD2 + BD2 = 2CD2 + 2AC2\par
.\par
The following enunciations include Propositions ix. and x.:\f1\emdash\par
1. The square on the sum of any two lines plus the square on their difference\par
equal twice the sum of their squares.\par
2. The sum of the squares on any two lines it equal to twice the square on\par
half the sum plus twice the square on half the difference of the lines.\par
3. If a line be cut into two unequal parts, and also into two equal parts, the\par
sum of the squares on the two unequal parts exceeds the sum of the squares on\par
the two equal parts by the sum of the squares of the two differences between the\par
equal and unequal parts.\par
Exercises\par
.\par
1. Given the sum or the difference of any two lines, and the sum of their squares; find the\par
lines.\par
2. The sum of the squares on two sides AC, CB of a triangle is equal to twice the square\par
on half the base AB, and twice the square on the median which bisects AB.\par
3. If the base of a triangle be given both in magnitude and position, and the sum of the\par
squares on the sides in magnitude, the locus of the vertex is a circle.\par
4. If in the 4 ABC a point D in the base BC be such that\par
BA2 + BD2 = CA2 + CD2\par
;\par
prove that the middle point of AD is equally distant from B and C.\par
5. The sum of the squares on the sides of a parallelogram is equal to the sum of the squares\par
on its diagonals.\par
PROP. XI.\emdash Problem.\par
To divide a given finite line (AB) into two segments\par
(in H), so that the rectangle (AB . BH) contained by the\par
whole line and one segment may be equal to the square\par
on the other segment.\par
Sol.\emdash On AB describe the square ABDC [I. xlvi.].\par
Bisect AC in E. Join BE. Produce EA to F, and make\par
EF equal to EB. On AF describe the square AF GH.\par
H is the point required.\par
Dem.\emdash Produce GH to K. Then because CA is\par
bisected in E, and divided externally in F, the rectangle\par
CF . AF, together with the square on EA, is equal to\par
the square on EF [vi.]; but EF is equal to EB (const.);\par
61\par
therefore the rectangle CF . AF, together with EA2\par
, is equal to EB2\emdash that is\par
[I. xlvii.] equal to EA2 + AB2\par
. Rejecting EA2\par
, which is common, we get the\par
rectangle CF . AF equal to AB2\par
. Again, since AF is equal to F G, being the\par
sides of a square, the rectangle CF . AF is equal to CF . F G\emdash that is, to the\par
figure CG; and AB2\par
is equal to the figure AD; therefore CG is equal to AD.\par
Reject the part AK, which is common, and we get the figure F H equal to the\par
figure HD; but HD is equal to the rectangle AB . BH, because BD is equal to\par
AB, and F H is the square on AH. Therefore the rectangle AB . BH is equal to\par
the square on AH.\par
Def.\emdash A line divided as in this Proposition is said to be divided in \ldblquote extreme\par
and mean ratio.\rdblquote\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The line CF is divided in \ldblquote extreme and mean ratio\rdblquote  at A.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If from the greater segment CA of CF we take a segment equal to\par
AF, it is evident that CA will be divided into parts respectively equal to AH,\par
HB. Hence, if a line be divided in extreme and mean ratio, the greater segment\par
will be cut in the same manner by taking on it a part equal to the less; and the\par
less will be similarly divided by taking on it a part equal to the difference, and\par
so on, &c.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash Let AB be divided in \ldblquote extreme\par
and mean ratio\rdblquote  in C, then it is evident (Cor.\par
2) that AC is greater than CB. Cut off CD =\par
CB; then (Cor. 2) AC is cut in \ldblquote extreme and mean ratio\rdblquote  at D, and CD is\par
greater than AD. Next, cut off DE equal to AD, and in the same manner we\par
have DE greater than EC, and so on. Now since CD is greater than AD, it\par
is evident that CD is not a common measure of AC and CB, and therefore\par
not a common measure of AB and AC. In like manner AD is not a common\par
measure of AC and CD, and therefore not a common measure of AB and AC.\par
Hence, no matter how far we proceed we cannot arrive at any remainder which\par
will be a common measure of AB and AC. Hence, the parts of a line divided in\par
\ldblquote extreme and mean ratio\rdblquote  are incommensurable.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Cut a line externally in \ldblquote extreme and mean ratio.\rdblquote\par
2. The difference between the squares on the segments of a line divided in \ldblquote extreme and\par
mean ratio\rdblquote  is equal to their rectangle.\par
3. In a right-angled triangle, if the square on one side be equal to the rectangle contained\par
by the hypotenuse and the other side, the hypotenuse is cut in \ldblquote extreme and mean ratio\rdblquote  by\par
the perpendicular on it from the right angle.\par
4. If AB be cut in \ldblquote extreme and mean ratio\rdblquote  at C, prove that\par
(1) AB2 + BC2 = 3AC2\par
.\par
(2) (AB + BC)\par
2 = 5AC2\par
.\par
5. The three lines joining the pairs of points G, B; F, D; A, K, in the construction of\par
Proposition xi., are parallel.\par
6. If CH intersect BE in O, AO is perpendicular to CH.\par
7. If CH be produced, it meets BF at right angles.\par
8. ABC is a right-angled triangle having AB = 2AC: if AH be made equal to the difference\par
between BC and AC, AB is divided in \ldblquote extreme and mean ratio\rdblquote  at H.\par
62\par
PROP. XII.\emdash Theorem.\par
In an obtuse-angled triangle (ABC), the square on the side (AB) subtending\par
the obtuse angle exceeds the sum of the squares on the sides (BC, CA) containing the obtuse angle, by twice the rectangle contained by either of them (BC),\par
and its continuation (CD) to meet a perpendicular (AD) on it from the opposite\par
angle.\par
Dem.\emdash Because BD is divided into two\par
parts in C, we have\par
BD2 = BC2 + CD2 + 2BC . CD [iv.]\par
and AD2 = AD2\par
.\par
Hence, adding, since [I. xlvii.] BD2 + AD2 =\par
AB2\par
, and CD2 + AD2 = CA2\par
, we get\par
AB2 = BC2 + CA2 + 2BC . CD.\par
Therefore AB2\par
is greater than BC2 + CA2\par
by 2BC . CD.\par
The foregoing proof differs from Euclid\rquote s only in\par
the use of symbols. I have found by experience that\par
pupils more readily understand it than any other\par
method.\par
Or thus: By the First Book: Describe squares\par
on the three sides. Draw AE, BF, CG perpendicular to the sides of the squares. Then it can be\par
proved exactly as in the demonstration of [I. xlvii.],\par
that the rectangle BG is equal to BE, AG to AF,\par
and CE to CF. Hence the sum of the two squares\par
on AC, CB is less than the square on AB by twice\par
the rectangle CE; that is, by twice the rectangle\par
BC . CD.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If perpendiculars from A and B to the\par
opposite sides meet them in H and D, the rectangle\par
AC . CH is equal to the rectangle BC . CD.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If the angle ACB of a triangle be equal to twice the angle of an equilateral triangle,\par
AB2 = BC2 + CA2 + BC . CA.\par
2. ABCD is a quadrilateral whose opposite angles B and D are right, and AD, BC\par
produced meet in E; prove AE . DE = BE . CE.\par
3. ABC is a right-angled triangle, and BD is a perpendicular on the hypotenuse AC;\par
Prove AB . DC = BD . BC.\par
4. If a line AB be divided in C so that AC2 = 2CB2\par
; prove that AB2 +BC2 = 2AB . AC.\par
5. If AB be the diameter of a semicircle, find a point C in AB such that, joining C to a fixed\par
point D in the circumference, and erecting a perpendicular CE meeting the circumference in\par
E, CE2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 CD2 may be equal to a given square.\par
6. If the square of a line CD, drawn from the angle C of an equilateral triangle ABC to\par
a point D in the side AB produced, be equal to 2AB2\par
; prove that AD is cut in \f1\ldblquote\f0 extreme and\par
mean ratio\f1\rdblquote  \f0 at B.\par
63\par
PROP. XIII.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
In any triangle (ABC), the square on any side subtending an acute angle (C)\par
is less than the sum of the squares on the sides containing that angle, by twice\par
the rectangle (BC, CD) contained by either of them (BC) and the intercept\par
(CD) between the acute angle and the foot of the perpendicular on it from the\par
opposite angle.\par
Dem.\emdash Because BC is divided into two segments in D,\par
BC2 + CD2 = BD2 + 2BC . CD [vii.];\par
and AD2 = AD2\par
.\par
Hence, adding, since\par
CD2 + AD2 = AC2\par
[I. xlvii.],\par
and BD2 + AD2 = AB2\par
,\par
we get BC2 + AC2 = AB2 + 2BC . CD.\par
Therefore AB2\par
is less than BC2 + AC2\par
by 2BC . CD.\par
Or thus: Describe squares on the sides. Draw AE, BF, CG perpendicular\par
to the sides; then, as in the demonstration of [I. xlvii.], the rectangle BG is\par
equal to BE; AG to AF, and CE to CF. Hence the sum of the squares on AC,\par
CB exceeds the square on AB by twice CE\emdash that is, by 2BC . CD.\par
Observation.\emdash By comparing the proofs of the pairs of Props. iv. and vii.; v. and vi.;\par
ix. and x.; xii. and xiii., it will be seen that they are virtually identical. In order to render\par
this identity more apparent, we have made some slight alterations in the usual proofs. The\par
pairs of Propositions thus grouped are considered in Modern Geometry not as distinct, but\par
each pair is regarded as one Proposition.\par
64\par
Exercises.\par
1. If the angle C of the 4 ACB be equal to an angle of an equilateral 4, AB2 =\par
AC2 + BC2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 AC . BC.\par
2. The sum of the squares on the diagonals of a quadrilateral, together with four times\par
the square on the line joining their middle points, is equal to the sum of the squares on its\par
sides.\par
3. Find a point C in a given line AB produced, so that AC2 + BC2 = 2AC . BC.\par
PROP. XIV.\f1\emdash Problem.\par
To construct a square equal to a given rectilineal figure (X).\par
Sol.\emdash Construct [I. xlv.] the rectangle AC equal to X. Then, if the adjacent\par
sides AB, BC be equal, AC is a square, and the problem is solved; if not,\par
produce AB to E, and make BE equal to BC; bisect AE in F; with F as\par
centre and F E as radius, describe the semicircle AGE; produce CB to meet it\par
in G. The square described on BG will be equal to X.\par
Dem.\emdash Join F G. Then because AE is divided equally in F and unequally\par
in B, the rectangle AB . BE, together with F B2\par
is equal to F E2\par
[v.], that is,\par
to F G2\par
; but F G2\par
is equal to F B2 + BG2\par
[I. xlvii.]. Therefore the rectangle\par
AB . BE +F B2\par
is equal to F B2 +BG2\par
. Reject F B2\par
, which is common, and we\par
have the rectangle AB . BE = BG2\par
; but since BE is equal to BC, the rectangle\par
AB . BE is equal to the figure AC. Therefore BG2\par
is equal to the figure AC,\par
and therefore equal to the given rectilineal figure (X).\par
Cor.\emdash The square on the perpendicular from any point in a semicircle on the\par
diameter is equal to the rectangle contained by the segments of the diameter.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Given the difference of the squares on two lines and their rectangle; find the lines.\par
2. Divide a given line, so that the rectangle contained by another given line and one\par
segment may be equal to the square on the other segment.\par
65\par
Questions for Examination on Book II.\par
1. What is the subject-matter of Book II.? Ans. Theory of rectangles.\par
2. What is a rectangle? A gnomon?\par
3. What is a square inch? A square foot? A square perch? A square mile? Ans. The\par
square described on a line whose length is an inch, a foot, a perch, &c.\par
4. What is the difference between linear and superficial measurement? Ans. Linear measurement has but one dimension; superficial has two.\par
5. When is a line said to be divided internally? When externally?\par
6. How is the area of a rectangle found?\par
7. How is a line divided so that the rectangle contained by its segments may be a maximum?\par
8. How is the area of a parallelogram found?\par
9. What is the altitude of a parallelogram whose base is 65 metres and area 1430 square\par
metres?\par
10. How is a line divided when the sum of the squares on its segments is a minimum?\par
11. The area of a rectangle is 108.60 square metres and its perimeter is 48.20 linear metres;\par
find its dimensions.\par
12. What Proposition in Book II. expresses the distributive law of multiplication?\par
13. On what proposition is the rule for extracting the square root founded?\par
14. Compare I. xlvii. and II. xii. and xiii.\par
15. If the sides of a triangle be expressed by x\par
2+1, x\par
2\f2\u8722?\f0 1, and 2x linear units, respectively;\par
prove that it is right-angled.\par
16. How would you construct a square whose area would be exactly an acre? Give a\par
solution by I. xlvii.\par
17. What is meant by incommensurable lines? Give an example from Book II.\par
18. Prove that a side and the diagonal of a square are incommensurable.\par
19. The diagonals of a lozenge are 16 and 30 metres respectively; find the length of a side.\par
20. The diagonal of a rectangle is 4.25 perches, and its area is 7.50 square perches; what\par
are its dimensions?\par
21. The three sides of a triangle are 8, 11, 15; prove that it has an obtuse angle.\par
22. The sides of a triangle are 13, 14, 15; find the lengths of its medians; also the lengths\par
of its perpendiculars, and prove that all its angles are acute.\par
23. If the sides of a triangle be expressed by m2 + n\par
2\par
, m2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 n\par
2\par
, and 2mn linear units,\par
respectively; prove that it is right-angled.\par
24. If on each side of a square containing 5.29 square perches we measure from the corners\par
respectively a distance of 1.5 linear perches; find the area of the square formed by joining the\par
points thus found.\par
Exercises on Book II.\par
1. The squares on the diagonals of a quadrilateral are together double the sum of the\par
squares on the lines joining the middle points of opposite sides.\par
2. If the medians of a triangle intersect in O, AB2 +BC2 +CA2 = 3(OA2 +OB2 +OC2\par
).\par
3. Through a given point O draw three lines OA, OB, OC of given lengths, such that\par
their extremities may be collinear, and that AB = BC.\par
4. If in any quadrilateral two opposite sides be bisected, the sum of the squares on the\par
other two sides, together with the sum of the squares on the diagonals, is equal to the sum of\par
the squares on the bisected sides, together with four times the square on the line joining the\par
points of bisection.\par
5. If squares be described on the sides of any triangle, the sum of the squares on the lines\par
joining the adjacent corners is equal to three times the sum of the squares on the sides of the\par
triangle.\par
6. Divide a given line into two parts, so that the rectangle contained by the whole and\par
one segment may be equal to any multiple of the square on the other segment.\par
7. If P be any point in the diameter AB of a semicircle, and CD any parallel chord, then\par
CP2 + P D2 = AP2 + P B2\par
.\par
66\par
8. If A, B, C, D be four collinear points taken in order,\par
AB . CD + BC . AD = AC . BD.\par
9. Three times the sum of the squares on the sides of any pentagon exceeds the sum of the\par
squares on its diagonals, by four times the sum of the squares on the lines joining the middle\par
points of the diagonals.\par
10. In any triangle, three times the sum of the squares on the sides is equal to four times\par
the sum of the squares on the medians.\par
11. If perpendiculars be drawn from the angular points of a square to any line, the sum of\par
the squares on the perpendiculars from one pair of opposite angles exceeds twice the rectangle\par
of the perpendiculars from the other pair by the area of the square.\par
12. If the base AB of a triangle be divided in D, so that mAD = nBD, then\par
mAC2 + nBC2 = mAD2 + nDB2 + (m + n)CD2\par
.\par
13. If the point D be taken in AB produced, so that mAD = nDB, then\par
mAC2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 nBC2 = mAD2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 nDB2 + (m \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 n)CD2\par
.\par
14. Given the base of a triangle in magnitude and position, and the sum or the difference\par
of m times the square on one side and n times the square on the other side, in magnitude,\par
the locus of the vertex is a circle.\par
15. Any rectangle is equal to half the rectangle contained by the diagonals of squares\par
described on its adjacent sides.\par
16. If A, B, C. &c., be any number of fixed points, and P a variable point, find the locus\par
of P, if AP2 + BP2 + CP2+ &c., be given in magnitude.\par
17. If the area of a rectangle be given, its perimeter is a minimum when it is a square.\par
18. If a transversal cut in the points A, C, B three lines issuing from a point D, prove\par
that\par
BC . AD2 + AC . BD2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 AB . CD2 = AB . BC . CA.\par
19. Upon the segments AC, CB of a line AB equilateral triangles are described: prove that\par
if D, D0 be the centres of circles described about these triangles, 6DD02 = AB2 +AC2 +CB2\par
.\par
20. If a, b, p denote the sides of a right-angled triangle about the right angle, and the\par
perpendicular from the right angle on the hypotenuse, 1\par
a\par
2\par
+\par
1\par
b\par
2\par
=\par
1\par
p\par
2\par
.\par
21. If, upon the greater segment AB of a line AC, divided in extreme and mean ratio, an\par
equilateral triangle ABD be described, and CD joined, CD2 = 2AB2\par
.\par
22. If a variable line, whose extremities rest on the circumferences of two given concentric\par
circles, subtend a right angle at any fixed point, the locus of its middle point is a circle.\par
67\par
BOOK III.\par
THEORY OF THE CIRCLE\par
DEFINITIONS.\par
i. Equal circles are those whose radii are equal.\par
This is a theorem, and not a definition. For if two circles have equal radii, they are\par
evidently congruent figures, and therefore equal. From this way of proving this theorem\par
Props. xxvi.\f1\endash xxix. follow as immediate inferences.\par
ii. A chord of a circle is the line joining two points in its circumference.\par
If the chord be produced both ways, the whole line is called a secant, and each of the\par
parts into which a secant divides the circumference is called an arc\emdash the greater the major\par
conjugate arc, and the lesser the minor conjugate arc.\emdash Newcomb.\par
iii. A right line is said to touch a circle when\par
it meets the circle, and, being produced both\par
ways, does not cut it; the line is called a tangent\par
to the circle, and the point where it touches it\par
the point of contact.\par
In Modern Geometry a curve is considered as made\par
up of an infinite number of points, which are placed in\par
order along the curve, and then the secant through two\par
consecutive points is a tangent. Euclid\rquote s definition for a\par
tangent is quite inadequate for any curve but the circle,\par
and those derived from it by projection (the conic sections); and even for these the modern\par
definition is better.\par
iv. Circles are said to touch one another when they meet, but do not intersect. There are two species of contact:\emdash\par
1. When each circle is external to the\par
other.\par
2. When one is inside the other.\par
The following is the modern definition of\par
curve-contact:\emdash  When two curves have two,\par
three, four, &c., consecutive points common,\par
they have contact of the first, second, third, &c., orders.\par
v. A segment of a circle is a figure bounded by a chord and one of the arcs\par
into which it divides the circumference.\par
vi. Chords are said to be equally distant from the centre when the perpendiculars drawn to them from the centre are equal.\par
vii. The angle contained by two lines, drawn from any point in the circumference of a segment to the extremities of its chord, is called an angle in the\par
segment.\par
68\par
viii. The angle of a segment is the angle contained between its chord and\par
the tangent at either extremity.\par
A theorem is tacitly assumed in this Definition, namely, that the angles which the chord\par
makes with the tangent at its extremities are equal. We shall prove this further on.\par
ix. An angle in a segment is said to stand on its conjugate arc.\par
x. Similar segments of circles are those that contain\par
equal angles.\par
xi. A sector of a circle is formed of two radii and\par
the arc included between them.\par
To a pair of radii may belong either of the two conjugate arcs\par
into which their ends divide the circle.\emdash Newcomb.\par
xii. Concentric circles are those that have the same centre.\par
xiii. Points which lie on the circumference of a circle are said to be concyclic.\par
xiv. A cyclic quadrilateral is one which is inscribed in a circle.\par
xv. It will be proper to give here an explanation of the extended meaning of\par
the word angle in Modern Geometry. This extension is necessary in Trigonometry, in Mechanics\emdash in fact, in every application of Geometry, and has been\par
partly given in I. Def. ix.\par
Thus, if a line OA revolve about the point O, as in figures 1, 2, 3, 4, until\par
it comes into the position OB, the amount of the rotation from OA to OB is\par
called an angle. From the diagrams we see that in fig. 1 it is less than two right\par
angles; in fig. 2 it is equal to two right angles; in fig. 3 greater than two right\par
angles, but less than four; and in fig. 4 it is greater than four right angles. The\par
arrow-heads denote the direction or sense, as it is technically termed, in which\par
the line OA turns. It is usual to call the direction indicated in the above figures\par
positive, and the opposite negative. A line such as OA, which turns about a\par
fixed point, is called a ray, and then we have the following definition:\emdash\par
xvi. A ray which turns in the sense opposite to the hands of a watch describes\par
a positive angle, and one which turns in the same direction as the hands, a\par
negative angle.\par
PROP. I.\emdash Problem.\par
To find the centre of a given circle (ADB).\par
69\par
Sol.\emdash Take any two points A, B in the circumference. Join AB. Bisect it in C. Erect CD at right\par
angles to AB. Produce DC to meet the circle again\par
in E. Bisect DE in F. Then F is the centre.\par
Dem.\emdash If possible, let any other point G be the\par
centre. Join GA, GC, GB. Then in the triangles\par
ACG, BCG we have AC equal to CB (const.), CG\par
common, and the base GA equal to GB, because they\par
are drawn from G, which is, by hypothesis, the centre,\par
to the circumference. Hence [I. viii.] the angle ACG is equal to the adjacent\par
angle BCG, and therefore [I. Def. xiii.] each is a right angle; but the angle\par
ACD is right (const.); therefore ACD is equal to ACG\emdash a part equal to the\par
whole\emdash which is absurd. Hence no point can be the centre which is not in the\par
line DE. Therefore F, the middle point of DE, must be the centre.\par
The foregoing proof may be abridged as follows:\emdash\par
Because ED bisects AB at right angles, every point equally distant from, the\par
points A, B must lie in ED [I. x. Ex. 2]; but the centre is equally distant from\par
A and B; hence the centre must be in ED; and since it must be equally distant\par
from E and D, it must be the middle point of DE.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The line which bisects any chord of a circle perpendicularly passes\par
through the centre of the circle.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The locus of the centres of the circles which pass through two fixed\par
points is the line bisecting at right angles that connecting the two points.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash If A, B, C be three points in the circumference of a circle, the lines\par
bisecting perpendicularly the chords AB, BC intersect in the centre.\par
PROP. II.\emdash Theorem.\par
If any two points (A, B) be taken in the circumference of a circle\emdash 1. The\par
segment (AB) of the indefinite line through these points which lies between them\par
falls within the circle. 2. The remaining parts of the line are without the circle.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let C be the centre. Take any\par
point D in AB. Join CA, CD, CB. Now the\par
angle ADC is [I. xvi.] greater than ABC;\par
but the angle ABC is equal to CAB [I. v.],\par
because the triangle CAB is isosceles; therefore the angle ADC is greater than CAD.\par
Hence AC is greater than CD [I. xix.]; therefore CD is less than the radius of the circle,\par
consequently the point D must be within the\par
circle (note on I. Def. xxiii.).\par
In the same manner every other point between A and B lies within the circle.\par
2. Take any point E in AB produced either way. Join CE. Then the angle\par
ABC is greater than AEC [I. xvi.]; therefore CAB is greater than AEC. Hence\par
CE is greater than CA, and the point E is without the circle.\par
70\par
We have added the second part of this Proposition. The indirect proof given of the first\par
part in several editions of Euclid is very inelegant; it is one of those absurd things which give\par
many students a dislike to Geometry.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash Three collinear points cannot be concyclic.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash A line cannot meet a circle in more than two points.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash The circumference of a circle is everywhere concave towards the\par
centre.\par
PROP. III.\endash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) passing through the centre of a circle bisect a chord (CD),\par
which does not pass through the centre, it cuts it at right angles. 2. If it cuts it\par
at right angles, it bisects it.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let O be the centre of the circle.\par
Join OC, OD. Then the triangles CEO, DEO\par
have CE equal to ED (hyp.), EO common, and\par
OC equal to OD, because they are radii of the\par
circle; hence [I. viii.] the angle CEO is equal to\par
DEO, and they are adjacent angles. Therefore [I.\par
Def. xiii.] each is a right angle. Hence AB cuts\par
CD at right angles.\par
2. The same construction being made: because\par
OC is equal to OD, the angle OCD is equal to\par
ODC [I. v.], and CEO is equal to DEO (hyp.), because each is right. Therefore\par
the triangles CEO, DEO have two angles in one respectively equal to two angles\par
in the other, and the side EO common. Hence [I. xxvi.] the side CE is equal\par
to ED. Therefore CD is bisected in E.\par
2. May be proved as follows:\emdash\par
OC2 = OE2+EC2\par
[I. xlvii.], and OD2 = OE2 + ED2\par
;\par
but OC2 =OD2\par
; \f2\u8756?\f1  \f0 OE2 + EC2 = OE2 + ED2\par
.\par
Hence EC2 = ED2\par
, and EC = ED.\par
Observation.\f1\emdash The three theorems, namely, Cor. 1., Prop. i., and Parts 1, 2, of Prop. iii.,\par
are so related, that any one being proved directly, the other two follow by the Rule of Identity.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The line which bisects perpendicularly one of two parallel chords\par
of a circle bisects the other perpendicularly.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The locus of the middle points of a system of parallel chords of a\par
circle is the diameter of the circle perpendicular to them all.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash If a line intersect two concentric circles, its intercepts between the\par
circles are equal.\par
Cor. 4.\emdash The line joining the centres of two intersecting circles bisects their\par
common chord perpendicularly.\par
71\par
Exercises.\par
1. If a chord of a circle subtend a right angle at a given point, the locus of its middle point\par
is a circle.\par
2. Every circle passing through a given point, and having its centre on a given line, passes\par
through another given point.\par
3. Draw a chord in a given circle which shall subtend a right angle at a given point, and\par
be parallel to a given line.\par
PROP. IV.\emdash Theorem.\par
Two chords of a circle (AB, CD) which are not both diameters cannot bisect\par
each other, though either may bisect the other.\par
Dem.\emdash Let O be the centre. Let AB, CD intersect in E; then since AB, CD are not both diameters, join OE. If possible let AE be equal to\par
EB, and CE equal to ED. Now, since OE passing through the centre bisects AB, which does not\par
pass through the centre, it is at right angles to it;\par
therefore the angle AEO is right. In like manner\par
the angle CEO is right. Hence AEO is equal to\par
CEO\emdash that is, a part equal to the whole\emdash which\par
is absurd. Therefore AB and CD do not bisect each other.\par
Cor.\emdash If two chords of a circle bisect each other, they are both diameters.\par
PROP. V.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two circles (ABC, ABD) cut one another in any point (A), they are not\par
concentric.\par
Dem.\emdash If possible let them have a common\par
centre at O. Join OA, and draw any other line\par
OD, cutting the circles in C and D respectively.\par
Then because O is the centre of the circle ABC,\par
OA is equal to OC. Again, because O is the centre\par
of the circle ABD, OA is equal to OD. Hence OC\par
is equal to OD\emdash a part equal to the whole\emdash which\par
is absurd. Therefore the circles are not concentric.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If two non-concentric circles intersect in one point, they must intersect in another point.\par
For, let O, O0 be the centres, A the point of intersection; from A let fall the \f2\u8869?\f1  \f0 AC on the line\par
OO0\par
. Produce AC to B, making BC = CA: then B is another point of intersection.\par
2. Two circles cannot have three points in common without wholly coinciding.\par
72\par
PROP. VI.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If one circle (ABC) touch another circle (ADE)\par
internally in any point (A), it is not concentric with\par
it.\par
Dem.\emdash If possible let the circles be concentric,\par
and let O be the centre of each. Join OA, and draw\par
any other line OD, cutting the circles in the points\par
B, D respectively. Then because O is the centre of\par
each circle (hyp.), OB and OD are each equal to\par
OA; therefore OB is equal to OD, which is impossible. Hence the circles cannot have the same centre.\par
PROP. VII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If from any point (P) within a circle, which is not the centre, lines (P A, P B,\par
P C, &c.), one of which passes through the centre, be drawn to the circumference,\par
then\emdash 1. The greatest is the line (P A) which passes through the centre. 2. The\par
production (P E) of this in the opposite direction is the least. 3. Of the others,\par
that which is nearest to the line through the centre is greater than every one more\par
remote. 4. Any two lines making equal angles with the diameter on opposite\par
sides are equal. 5. More than two equal right lines cannot be drawn from the\par
given point (P) to the circumference.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let O be the centre. Join OB. Now since O is the centre, OA is\par
equal to OB: to each add OP, and we have AP equal to the sum of OB, OP;\par
but the sum of OB, OP is greater than P B [I. xx.]. Therefore P A is greater\par
than P B.\par
2. Join OD. Then [I. xx.] the sum of OP,\par
P D is greater than OD; but OD is equal to OE\par
[I. Def. xxx.]. Therefore the sum of OP, P D is\par
greater than OE. Reject OP, which is common,\par
and we have P D greater than P E.\par
3. Join OC; then two triangles P OB, P OC\par
have the side OB equal to OC [I. Def. xxx.],\par
and OP common; but the angle P OB is greater\par
than P OC; therefore [I. xxiv.] the base P B is\par
greater than P C. In like manner P C is greater\par
than P D.\par
4. Make at the centre O the angle P OF equal\par
to P OD. Join P F. Then the triangles P OD, P OF have the two sides OP,\par
OD in one respectively equal to the sides OP, OF in the other, and the angle\par
P OD equal to the angle P OF; hence P D is equal to P F [I. iv.], and the angle\par
OP D equal to the angle OP F. Therefore P D and P F make equal angles with\par
the diameter.\par
73\par
5. A third line cannot be drawn from P equal to either of the equal lines\par
P D, P F. If possible let P G be equal to P D, then P G is equal to P F\emdash that is,\par
the line which is nearest to the one through the centre is equal to the one which\par
is more remote, which is impossible. Hence three equal lines cannot be drawn\par
from P to the circumference.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If two equal lines P D, P F be drawn from a point P to the circumference of a circle, the diameter through P bisects the angle DP F formed by\par
these lines.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If P be the common centre of circles whose radii are P A, P B, P C,\par
&c., then\emdash 1. The circle whose radius is the maximum line (P A) lies outside\par
the circle ADE, and touches it in A [Def. iv.]. 2. The circle whose radius is\par
the minimum line (P E) lies inside the circle ADE, and touches it in E. 3. A\par
circle having any of the remaining lines (P D) as radius cuts ADE in two points\par
(D, F).\par
Observation.\emdash Proposition vii. affords a good illustration of the following important definition (see Sequel to Euclid, p. 13):\emdash If a geometrical magnitude varies its position continuously\par
according to any law, and if it retains the same value throughout, it is said to be a constant,\par
such as the radius of a circle revolving round the centre; but if it goes on increasing for some\par
time, and then begins to decrease, it is said to be a maximum at the end of the increase.\par
Thus, in the foregoing figure, P A, supposed to revolve round P and meet the circle, is a\par
maximum. Again, if it decreases for some time, and then begins to increase, it is a minimum\par
at the commencement of the increase. Thus P E, supposed as before to revolve round P and\par
meet the circle, is a minimum. Proposition viii. will give other illustrations.\par
PROP. VIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If from any point (P) outside a circle, lines (P A, P B, P C, &c.) be drawn\par
to the concave circumference, then\emdash\par
1. The maximum is that which passes\par
through the centre. 2. Of the others,\par
that which is nearer to the one through\par
the centre is greater than the one more\par
remote. Again, if lines be drawn to\par
the convex circumference\emdash 3. The minimum is that whose production passes\par
through the centre. 4. Of the others, that which is nearer to the minimum is less than one more remote.\par
5. From the given point (P) there can be\par
drawn two equal lines to the concave or\par
the convex circumference, both of which\par
make equal angles with the line passing\par
through the centre. 6. More than two\par
equal lines cannot be drawn from the given point (P) to either circumference.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let O be the centre. Join OB. Now since O is the centre, OA is\par
equal to OB: to each add OP, and we have AP equal to the sum of OB, OP;\par
74\par
but the sum of OB, OP is greater than BP [I. xx.]. Therefore AP is greater\par
than BP.\par
2. Join OC, OD. The two triangles BOP, COP have the side OB equal\par
to OC, and OP common, and the angle BOP greater than COP; therefore the\par
base BP is greater than CP [I. xxiv.]. In like manner CP is greater than DP,\par
&c.\par
3. Join OF. Now in the triangle OF P the sum of the sides OF, F P is\par
greater than OP [I. xx.]; but OF is equal to OE [I. Def. xxx.]. Reject them,\par
and F P will remain greater than EP.\par
4. Join OG, OH. The two triangles GOP, F OP have two sides GO, OP in\par
one respectively equal to two sides F O, OP in the other; but the angle GOP\par
is greater than F OP; therefore [I. xxiv.] the base GP is greater than F P. In\par
like manner HP is greater than GP.\par
5. Make the angle P OI equal P OF [I. xxiii.]. Join IP. Now the triangles\par
IOP, F OP have two sides IO, OP in one respectively equal to two sides F O,\par
OP in the other, and the angle IOP equal to F OP (const.); therefore [I. iv.]\par
IP is equal to F P.\par
6. A third line cannot be drawn from P equal to either of the lines IP, F P.\par
For if possible let PK be equal to P F; then PK is equal to P I\emdash that is, one\par
which is nearer to the minimum equal to one more remote\emdash which is impossible.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If P I be produced to meet the circle again in L, P L is equal to\par
P B.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If two equal lines be drawn from P to either the convex or concave\par
circumference, the diameter through P bisects the angle between them, and the\par
parts of them intercepted by the circle are equal.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash If P be the common centre of circles whose radii are lines drawn\par
from P to the circumference of HDE, then\emdash 1. The circle whose radius is the\par
minimum line (P E) has contact of the first kind with ADE [Def. iv.]. 2. The\par
circle whose radius is the maximum line (P A) has contact of the second kind.\par
3. A circle having any of the remaining lines (P F) as radius intersects HDE in\par
two points (F, I).\par
PROP. IX.\emdash Theorem.\par
A point (P) within a circle (ABC), from which\par
more than two equal lines (P A, P B, P C, &c.) can\par
be drawn to the circumference, is the centre.\par
Dem.\emdash If P be not the centre, let O be the centre. Join OP, and produce it to meet the circle in D\par
and E; then DE is the diameter, and P is a point in\par
it which is not the centre: therefore [vii.] only two\par
equal lines can be drawn from P to the circumference; but three equal lines are drawn (hyp.), which\par
is absurd. Hence P must be the centre.\par
75\par
Or thus: Since the lines AP, BP are equal, the line bisecting the angle AP B [vii. Cor. 1]\par
must pass through the centre: in like manner the line bisecting the angle BP C must pass\par
through the centre. Hence the point of intersection of these bisectors, that is, the point P,\par
must be the centre.\par
PROP. X.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two circles have more than two points common, they must coincide.\par
Dem.\emdash Let X be one of the circles; and if\par
possible let another circle Y have three points, A,\par
B, C, in common with X, without coinciding with\par
it. Find P, the centre of X. Join P A, P B, P C.\par
Then since P is the centre of X, the three lines\par
P A, P B, P C are equal to one another.\par
Again, since Y is a circle and P a point, from\par
which three equal lines P A, P B, P C can be\par
drawn to its circumference, P must be the centre of Y . Hence X and Y are concentric, which\par
[v.] is impossible.\par
Cor.\emdash Two circles not coinciding cannot have more than two points common.\par
Compare I., Axiom x., that two right lines not coinciding cannot have more than\par
one point common.\par
PROP. XI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If one circle (CP D) touch another circle (AP B) internally at any point P, the\par
line joining the centres must pass through that point.\par
Dem.\emdash Let O be the centre of AP B. Join OP.\par
I say the centre of the smaller circle is in the line\par
OP. If not, let it be in any other position such as\par
E. Join OE, EP, and produce OE through E to\par
meet the circles in the points C, A. Now since E is a\par
point in the diameter of the larger circle between the\par
centre and A, EA is less than EP [vii. 2]; but EP is\par
equal to EC (hyp.), being radii of the smaller circle.\par
Hence EA is less than EC; which is impossible;\par
consequently the centre of the smaller circle must\par
be in the line OP. Let it be H; then we see that the line joining the centres\par
passes through the point P.\par
Or thus: Since EP is a line drawn from a point within the circle AP B to\par
the circumference, but not forming part of the diameter through E, the circle\par
whose centre is E and radius EP cuts [vii., Cor. 2] AP B in P, but it touches\par
it (hyp.) also in P, which is impossible. Hence the centre of the smaller circle\par
CP D must be in the line OP.\par
76\par
PROP. XII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two circles (P CF, P DE) have external contact at any point P, the line\par
joining their centres must pass through that point.\par
Dem.\emdash Let A be the centre of one of\par
the circles. Join AP, and produce it to\par
meet the second circle again in E. I say\par
the centre of the second circle is in the line\par
P E. If not, let it be elsewhere, as at B.\par
Join AB, intersecting the circles in C and\par
D, and join BP. Now since A is the centre\par
of the circle P CF, AP is equal to AC; and since B is the centre of the circle\par
P DE, BP is equal to BD. Hence the sum of the lines AP, BP is equal to\par
the sum of the lines AC, DB; but AB is greater than the sum of AC and DB;\par
therefore AB is greater than the sum of AP, P B\emdash that is, one side of a triangle\par
greater than the sum of the other two\endash which [I. xx.] is impossible. Hence the\par
centre of the second circle must be in the line P E. Let it be G, and we see that\par
the line through the centres passes through the point P.\par
Or thus: Since BP is a line drawn from a point without the circle P CF\par
to its circumference, and when produced does not pass through the centre, the\par
circle whose centre is B and radius BP must cut the circle P CF in P [viii.,\par
Cor. 3]; but it touches it (hyp.) also in P, which is impossible. Hence the centre\par
of the second circle must be in the line P E.\par
Observation.\emdash Propositions xi, xii., may both be included in one enunciation as follows:\emdash\par
\ldblquote If two circles touch each other at any point, the centres and that point are collinear.\rdblquote  And this\par
latter Proposition is a limiting case of the theorem given in Proposition iii., Cor. 4, that \ldblquote The\par
line joining the centres of two intersecting circles bisects the common chord perpendicularly.\rdblquote\par
Suppose the circle whose centre is O and one of the points of intersection A to remain\par
fixed, while the second circle turns round that point in such a manner that the second point\par
of intersection B becomes ultimately consecutive to A; then, since the line OO0 always bisects\par
AB, we see that when B ultimately becomes consecutive to A, the line OO0 passes through\par
A. In consequence of the motion, the common chord will become in the limit a tangent to\par
each circle, as in the second diagram.\emdash Comberousse, G\f0\'b4eom\'b4etrie Plane, page 57.\par
Cor. 1.\f1\emdash If two circles touch each other, their point of contact is the union of two points\par
of intersection. Hence a contact counts for two intersections.\par
77\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If two circles touch each other at any point, they\par
cannot have any other common point. For, since two circles\par
cannot have more than two points common [x.], and that the\par
point of contact is equivalent to two common points, circles that\par
touch cannot have any other point common. The following is a\par
formal proof of this Proposition:\emdash Let O, O0 be the centres of\par
the two circles, A the point of contact, and let O0\par
lie between O\par
and A; take any other point B in the circumference of O. Join\par
O0B; then [vii.] O0B is greater than O0A; therefore the point C\par
is outside the circumference of the smaller circle. Hence B cannot be common to both circles.\par
In like manner, they cannot have any other common point but A.\par
PROP. XIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
Two circles cannot have double contact, that it, cannot touch each other in two\par
points.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. If possible let two circles touch each\par
other at two points A and B. Now since the two\par
circles touch each other in A, the line joining their\par
centres passes through A [xi.]. In like manner,\par
it passes through B. Hence the centres and the\par
points A, B are in one right line; therefore AB is a\par
diameter of each circle. Hence, if AB be bisected\par
in E, E must be the centre of each circle\emdash that is,\par
the circles are concentric\emdash which [v.] is impossible.\par
2. If two circles touched each other externally in two distinct points, then\par
[xii.] the line joining the centres should pass through each point, which is\par
impossible.\par
Or thus: Draw a line bisecting AB at right angles. Then this line [i., Cor. 1]\par
must pass through the centre of each circle, and therefore [xi. xii.] must pass\par
through each point of contact, which is impossible. Hence two circles cannot\par
have double contact.\par
This Proposition is an immediate inference from the theorem [xii., Cor. 1], that a point\par
of contact counts for two intersections, for then two contacts would be equivalent to four\par
intersections; but there cannot be more than two intersections [x.]. It also follows from\par
Prop. xii., Cor. 2, that if two circles touch each other in a point A, they cannot have any\par
other point common; hence they cannot touch again in B.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If a variable circle touch two fixed circles externally, the difference of the distances of\par
its centre from the centres of the fixed circles is equal to the difference or the sum of their\par
radii, according as the contacts are of the same or of opposite species (Def. iv.).\par
2. If a variable circle be touched by one of two fixed circles internally, and touch the\par
other fixed circle either externally or internally, the sum of the distances of its centre from\par
the centres of the fixed circles is equal to the sum or the difference of their radii, according as\par
the contact with the second circle is of the first or second kind.\par
3. If through the point of contact of two touching circles any secant be drawn cutting the\par
circles again in two points, the radii drawn to these points are parallel.\par
78\par
4. If two diameters of two touching circles be parallel, the lines from the point of contact\par
to the extremities of one diameter pass through the extremities of the other.\par
PROP. XIV.\emdash Theorem.\par
In equal circles\emdash 1. equal chords (AB, CD) are equally distant from the\par
centre. 2. chords which are equally distant from the centre are equal.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let O be the centre. Draw the perpendiculars OE, OF. Join AO, CO. Then because\par
AB is a chord in a circle, and OE is drawn from\par
the centre cutting it at right angles, it bisects it\par
[iii.]; therefore AE is the half of AB. In like manner, CF is the half of CD; but AB is equal to\par
CD (hyp.). Therefore AE is equal to CF [I., Axiom vii.]. And because E is a right angle, AO2\par
is\par
equal to AE2 + EO2\par
. In like manner, CO2\par
is equal\par
to CF2 + F O2\par
; but AO2\par
is equal to CO2\par
. Therefore\par
AE2 + EO2\par
is equal to CF2 + F O2\par
; and AE2 has been proved equal to CF2\par
.\par
Hence EO2\par
is equal to F O2\par
; therefore EO is equal to F O. Hence AB, CD are\par
(Def. vi.) equally distant from the centre.\par
2. Let EO be equal to F O, it is required to prove AB equal to CD. The same\par
construction being made, we have, as before, AE2 + EO2\par
equal to CF2 + F O2\par
;\par
but EO2\par
is equal to F O2\par
(hyp.). Hence AE2\par
is equal to CF2\par
, and AE is equal\par
to CF; but AB is double of AE, and CD double of CF. Therefore AB is equal\par
to CD.\par
Exercise.\par
If a chord of given length slide round a fixed circle\emdash 1. the locus of its middle point is a\par
circle; 2. the locus of any point fixed in the chord is a circle.\par
PROP. XV.\emdash Theorem.\par
The diameter (AB) is the greatest chord in a circle; and of the others, the\par
chord (CD) which is nearer to the centre is greater than (EF) one more remote,\par
and the greater is nearer to the centre than the less.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Join OC, OD, OE, and draw the\par
perpendiculars OG, OH; then because O is the\par
centre, OA is equal to OC [I., Def. xxxii.], and\par
OB is equal to OD. Hence AB is equal to the\par
sum of OC and OD; but the sum of OC, OD is\par
greater than CD [I. xx.]. Therefore AB is greater\par
than CD.\par
2. Because the chord CD is nearer to the centre than EF, OG is less than OH; and since the\par
79\par
triangles OGC, OHE are right-angled, we have OC2 = OG2 + GC2\par
, and\par
OE2 = OH2 + HE2\par
; therefore OG2 + GC2 = OH2 + HE2\par
; but OG2\par
is less\par
than OH2\par
; therefore GC2\par
is greater than HE2\par
, and GC is greater than HE,\par
but CD and EF are the doubles of GC and HE. Hence CD is greater than\par
EF.\par
3. Let CD be greater than EF, it is required to prove that OG is less than\par
OH.\par
As before, we have OG2 + GC2\par
equal to OH2 + HE2\par
; but CG2\par
is greater\par
than EH2\par
; therefore OG2\par
is less than OH2\par
. Hence OG is less than OH.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The shortest chord which can be drawn through a given point within a circle is the\par
perpendicular to the diameter which passes through that point.\par
2. Through a given point, within or without a given circle, draw a chord of length equal\par
to that of a given chord.\par
3. Through one of the points of intersection of two circles draw a secant\emdash 1. the sum of\par
whose segments intercepted by the circles shall be a maximum; 2. which shall be of any length\par
less than that of the maximum.\par
4. Three circles touch each other externally at A, B, C; the chords AB, AC of two of them\par
are produced to meet the third again in the points D and E; prove that DE is a diameter of\par
the third circle, and parallel to the line joining the centres of the others.\par
PROP. XVI.\emdash Theorem.\par
1. The perpendicular (BI) to the diameter (AB) of a circle at its extremity\par
(B) touches the circle at that point. 2. Any other line (BH) through the same\par
point cuts the circle.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Take any point I, and join it to\par
the centre C. Then because the angle CBI is a\par
right angle, CI2\par
is equal to CB2+BI2\par
[I. xlvii.];\par
therefore CI2\par
is greater than CB2\par
. Hence CI\par
is greater than CB, and the point I [note on I.,\par
Def. xxxii.] is without the circle. In like manner,\par
every other point in BI, except B, is without the\par
circle. Hence, since BI meets the circle at B, but\par
does not cut it, it must touch it.\par
2. To prove that BH, which is not perpendicular to AB, cuts the circle. Draw CG perpendicular to HB. Now BC2\par
is\par
equal to CG2 + GB2\par
. Therefore BC2\par
is greater than CG2\par
, and BC is greater\par
than CG. Hence [note on I., Def. xxxii.] the point G must be within the circle,\par
and consequently the line BG produced must meet the circle again, and must\par
therefore cut it.\par
This Proposition may be proved as follows:\par
At every point on a circle the tangent is perpendicular to the radius.\par
80\par
Let P and Q be two consecutive points on the circumference. Join CP, CQ, P Q; produce P Q both\par
ways. Now since P and Q are consecutive points, P Q\par
is a tangent (Def. iii.). Again, the sum of the three\par
angles of the triangle CP Q is equal to two right angles;\par
but the angle C is infinitely small, and the others are\par
equal. Hence each of them is a right angle. Therefore\par
the tangent is perpendicular to the diameter.\par
Or thus: A tangent is a limiting position of a secant, namely, when the\par
secant moves out until the two points of intersection with the circle become\par
consecutive; but the line through the centre which bisects the part of the secant\par
within the circle [iii.] is perpendicular to it. Hence, in the limit the tangent is\par
perpendicular to the line from the centre to the point of contact.\par
Or again: The angle CP R is always equal to CQS; hence, when P and\par
Q come together each is a right angle, and the tangent is perpendicular to the\par
radius.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If two circles be concentric, all chords of the greater which touch the lesser are equal.\par
2. Draw a parallel to a given line to touch a given circle.\par
3. Draw a perpendicular to a given line to touch a given circle.\par
4. Describe a circle having its centre at a given point\emdash 1. and touching a given line; 2. and\par
touching a given circle. How many solutions of this case?\par
5. Describe a circle of given radius that shall touch two given lines. How many solutions?\par
6. Find the locus of the centres of a system of circles touching two given lines.\par
7. Describe a circle of given radius that shall touch a given circle and a given line, or that\par
shall touch two given circles.\par
PROP. XVII.\emdash Problem.\par
From a given point (P) without a given circle (BCD) to draw a tangent to the\par
circle.\par
81\par
Sol.\emdash Let O (fig. 1) be the centre of the given circle. Join OP, cutting the\par
circumference in C. With O as centre, and OP as radius, describe the circle\par
AP E. Erect CA at right angles to OP. Join OA, intersecting the circle BCD\par
in B. Join BP; it will be the tangent required.\par
Dem.\emdash Since O is the centre of the two circles, we have OA equal to OP,\par
and OC equal to OB. Hence the two triangles AOC, P OB have the sides\par
OA, OC in one respectively equal to the sides OP, OB in the other, and the\par
contained angle common to both. Hence [I. iv.] the angle OCA is equal to\par
OBP; but OCA is a right angle (const.); therefore OBP is a right angle, and\par
[xvi.] P B touches the circle at B.\par
Cor.\emdash If AC (fig. 2) be produced to E, OE joined, cutting the circle BCD\par
in D, and the line DP drawn, DP will be another tangent from P.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The two tangents P B, P D (fig. 2) are equal to one another, because the square of each\par
is equal to the square of OP minus the square of the radius.\par
2. If two circles be concentric, all tangents to the inner from points on the outer are equal.\par
3. If a quadrilateral be circumscribed to a circle, the sum of one pair of opposite sides is\par
equal to the sum of the other pair.\par
4. If a parallelogram be circumscribed to a circle it must be a lozenge, and its diagonals\par
intersect in the centre.\par
5. If BD be joined, intersecting OP in F, OP is perpendicular to BD.\par
6. The locus of the intersection of two equal tangents to two circles is a right line (called\par
the radical axis of the two circles).\par
7. Find a point such that tangents from it to three given circles shall be equal. (This point\par
is called the radical centre of the three circles.)\par
8. The rectangle OF . OP is equal to the square of the radius.\par
Def. Two points, such as F and P, the rectangle of whose distances OF, OP from the\par
centre is equal to the square of the radius, are called inverse points with respect to the circle.\par
9. The intercept made on a variable tangent by two fixed tangents subtends a constant\par
angle at the centre.\par
10. Draw a common tangent to two circles. Hence, show how to draw a line cutting two\par
circles, so that the intercepted chords shall be of given lengths.\par
PROP. XVIII.\emdash Theorem\par
If a line (CD) touch a circle, the line (OC) from the centre to the point of\par
contact is perpendicular to it.\par
Dem.\emdash If not, suppose another line OG\par
drawn from the centre to be perpendicular to\par
CD. Let OG cut the circle in F. Then because\par
the angle OGC is right (hyp.) the angle OCG\par
[I. xvii.] must be acute. Therefore [I. xix.]\par
OC is greater than OG; but OC is equal to OF\par
[I. Def. xxxii.]; therefore OF is greater than\par
OG\emdash that is, a part greater than the whole,\par
which is impossible. Hence OC must be perpendicular to CD.\par
82\par
Or thus: Since the perpendicular must be the shortest line from O to CD, and OC is\par
evidently the shortest line; therefore OC must be perpendicular to CD.\par
PROP. XIX.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (AB) be a tangent to a circle, the line (AC) drawn at right angles to\par
it from the point of contact passes through the centre.\par
If the centre be not in AC, let O be the\par
centre. Join AO. Then because AB touches the\par
circle, and OA is drawn from the centre to the\par
point of contact, OA is at right angles to AB\par
[xviii.]; therefore the angle OAB is right, and\par
the angle CAB is right (hyp.); therefore OAB\par
is equal to CAB\emdash a part equal to the whole,\par
which is impossible. Hence the centre must be\par
in the line AC.\par
Cor.\emdash If a number of circles touch the same\par
line at the same point, the locus of their centres\par
is the perpendicular to the line at the point.\par
Observation.\emdash Propositions xvi., xviii., xix., are so related that any two can be inferred\par
from the third by the \ldblquote Rule of Identity.\rdblquote  Hence it would, in strict logic, be sufficient to prove\par
any one of the three, and the others would follow. Again, these three theorems are limiting\par
cases of Proposition i., Cor. 1., and Parts 1, 2, of Proposition iii., namely, when the points in\par
which the chord cuts the circle become consecutive.\par
PROP. XX.\emdash Theorem.\par
The angle (AOB) at the centre (O) of a circle is double the angle (ACB) at\par
the circumference standing on the same arc.\par
Dem.\emdash Join CO, and produce it to E. Then because OA is equal to OC,\par
the angle ACO is equal to OAC; but the angle AOE is equal to the sum of the\par
two angles OAC, ACO. Hence the angle AOE is double the angle ACO. In like\par
83\par
manner the angle EOB is double the angle OCB. Hence (by adding in figs. (\f3\lang1032\'e1),\par
(\'e2), and subtracting in (\'e3)), the angle AOB is double of the angle ACB.\par
Cor.\f1\emdash If AOB be a straight line, ACB will be a right angle\emdash that is, the\par
angle in a semicircle is a right angle (compare xxxi.).\par
PROP. XXI.\emdash Theorem.\par
The angles (ACB, ADB) in the same segment of a circle are equal.\par
Dem.\emdash Let O be the centre. Join OA, OB. Then the angle AOB is double\par
of the angle ACB [xx.], and also double of the angle ADB. Therefore the angle\par
ACB is equal to the angle ADB.\par
The following is the proof of the second part\emdash that is, when the arc AB\par
is not greater than a semicircle, without using angles greater than two right\par
angles:\emdash\par
Let O be the centre. Join CO, and produce\par
it to meet the circle again in E. Join DE. Now\par
since O is the centre, the segment ACE is greater\par
than a semicircle; hence, by the first case, fig. (\f3\'e1),\par
the angle ACE is equal to ADE. In like manner\par
the angle ECB is equal to EDB. Hence the whole\par
angle ACB is equal to the whole angle ADB.\par
Cor. 1.\f1\emdash If two triangles ACB, ADB on the\par
same base AB, and on the same side of it, have\par
equal vertical angles, the four points A, C, D, B are concyclic.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If A, B be two fixed points, and if C varies its position in such a\par
way that the angle ACB retains the same value throughout, the locus of C is a\par
circle.\par
In other words\emdash Given the base of a triangle and the vertical angle, the locus\par
of the vertex is a circle.\par
84\par
Exercises.\par
1. Given the base of a triangle and the vertical angle, find the locus\emdash\par
(1) of the intersection of its perpendiculars;\par
(2) of the intersection of the internal bisectors of its base angles;\par
(3) of the intersection of the external bisectors of the base angles;\par
(4) of the intersection of the external bisector of one base angle and the internal bisector\par
of the other.\par
2. If the sum of the squares of two lines be given, their sum is a maximum when the lines\par
are equal.\par
3. Of all triangles having the same base and vertical angle, the sum of the sides of an\par
isosceles triangle is a maximum.\par
4. Of all triangles inscribed in a circle, the equilateral triangle has the maximum perimeter.\par
5. Of all concyclic figures having a given number of sides, the area is a maximum when\par
the sides are equal.\par
PROP. XXII.\emdash Theorem.\par
The sum of the opposite angles of a quadrilateral (ABCD) inscribed in a circle\par
is two right angles.\par
Dem.\emdash Join AC, BD. The angle ABD is equal to ACD, being in the same\par
segment ABCD [xxi.]; and the angle DBC is equal to DAC, because they are\par
in the same segment DABC. Hence the whole angle ABC is equal to the sum\par
of the two angles ACD, DAC. To each add the angle CDA, and we have the\par
sum of the two angles ABC, CDA equal to the sum of the three angles ACD,\par
DAC, CDA of the triangle ACD; but the sum of the three angles of a triangle\par
is equal to two right angles [I. xxxii.]. Therefore the sum of ABC, CDA is two\par
right angles.\par
Or thus: Let O be the centre of the circle. Join OA, OC (see fig. 2). Now\par
the angle AOC is double of CDA [xx.], and the angle COA is double of ABC.\par
Hence the sum of the angles [I. Def. ix., note] AOC, COA is double of the sum\par
of the angles CDA, ABC; but the sum of two angles AOC, COA is four right\par
angles. Therefore the sum of the angles CDA, ABC is two right angles.\par
Or again: Let O be the centre (fig. 2). Join OA, OB OC, OD. Then the\par
four triangles AOB, BOC, COD, DOA are each isosceles. Hence the angle\par
OAB is equal to the angle OBA, and the angle OAD equal to the angle ODA;\par
therefore the angle BAD is equal to the sum of the angles OBA, ODA. In like\par
85\par
manner the angle BCD is equal to the sum of the angles OBC, ODC. Hence\par
the sum of the two angles BAD, BCD is equal to the sum of the two angles\par
ABC, ADC, and hence each sum is two right angles.\par
Cor.\emdash If a parallelogram be inscribed in a circle it is a rectangle.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If the opposite angles of a quadrilateral be supplemental, it is cyclic.\par
2. If a figure of six sides be inscribed in a circle, the sum of any three alternate angles is\par
four right angles.\par
3. A line which makes equal angles with one pair of opposite sides of a cyclic quadrilateral,\par
makes equal angles with the remaining pair and with the diagonals.\par
4. If two opposite sides of a cyclic quadrilateral be produced to meet, and a perpendicular\par
be let fall on the bisector of the angle between them from the point of intersection of the\par
diagonals, this perpendicular will bisect the angle between the diagonals.\par
5. If two pairs of opposite sides of a cyclic hexagon be respectively parallel to each other,\par
the remaining pair of sides are also parallel.\par
6. If two circles intersect in the points A, B, and any two lines ACD, BF E, be drawn\par
through A and B, cutting one of the circles in the points C, E, and the other in the points\par
D, F, the line CE is parallel to DF.\par
7. If equilateral triangles be described on the sides of any triangle, the lines joining the\par
vertices of the original triangle to the opposite vertices of the equilateral triangles are concurrent.\par
8. In the same case prove that the centres of the circles described about the equilateral\par
triangles form another equilateral triangle.\par
9. If a quadrilateral be described about a circle, the angles at the centre subtended by the\par
opposite sides are supplemental.\par
10. The perpendiculars of a triangle are concurrent.\par
11. If a variable tangent meets two parallel tangents it subtends a right angle at the centre.\par
12. The feet of the perpendiculars let fall on the sides of a triangle from any point in the\par
circumference of the circumscribed circle are collinear (Simson).\par
Def.\emdash The line of collinearity is called Simson\rquote s line.\par
13. If a hexagon be circumscribed about a circle, the sum of the angles subtended at the\par
centre by any three alternate sides is equal to two right angles.\par
PROP. XXIII\emdash Theorem.\par
Two similar segments of circles which do not coincide cannot be constructed\par
on the same chord (AB), and on the same side of that chord.\par
Dem.\emdash If possible, let ACB, ADB, be\par
two similar segments constructed on the\par
same side of AB. Take any point D in the\par
inner one. Join AD, and produce it to meet\par
the outer one in C. Join BC, BD. Then\par
since the segments are similar, the angle ADB is equal to ACB (Def. x.),\par
which is impossible [I. xvi.]. Hence two similar segments not coinciding cannot\par
be described on the same chord and on the same side of it.\par
86\par
PROP. XXIV.\emdash Theorem.\par
Similar segments of circles (AEB, CF D) on equal chords (AB, CD) are\par
equal to one another.\par
Dem.\emdash Since the lines are equal, if AB be applied to CD, so that the point\par
A will coincide with C, and the line AB with CD, the point B shall coincide\par
with D; and because the segments are similar, they must coincide [xxiii.]. Hence\par
they are equal.\par
This demonstration may be stated as follows:\emdash Since the chords are equal, they are congruent; and therefore the segments, being similar, must be congruent.\par
PROP. XXV.\emdash Problem.\par
An arc (ABC) of a circle being given, it is required to describe the whole circle.\par
Sol.\emdash Take any three points A, B, C in the arc. Join AB, BC. Bisect AB\par
in D, and BC in E. Erect DF, EF at right angles to AB, BC; then F, the\par
point of intersection, will be the centre of the circle.\par
Dem.\emdash Because DF bisects the chord AB and\par
is perpendicular to it, it passes through the centre\par
[i., Cor. 1]. In like manner EF passes through the\par
centre. Hence the point F must be the centre; and\par
the circle described from F as centre, with F A as\par
radius, will be the circle required.\par
PROP. XXVI.\emdash Theorem.\par
The four Propositions xxvi.\endash xxix. are so like in their enunciations that students frequently substitute one for another. The following scheme will assist in remembering them:\emdash\par
In Proposition xxvi. are given angles =, to prove arcs =,\par
,, xxvii. ,, arcs =, ,, angles =,\par
,, xxviii. ,, chords =, ,, arcs =,\par
,, xxix. ,, arcs =, ,, chords =;\par
so that Proposition xxvii. is the converse of xxvi., and xxix. of xxviii.\par
In equal circles (ACB, DF E), equal angles at the centres (AOB, DHE) or at\par
the circumferences (ACB, DF E) stand upon equal arcs.\par
87\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Suppose the angles\par
at the centres to be given equal.\par
Now because the circles are equal\par
their radii are equal (Def. i.).\par
Therefore the two triangles AOB,\par
DHE have the sides AO, OB in\par
one respectively equal to the sides\par
DH, HE in the other, and the\par
angle AOB equal to DHE (hyp.).\par
Therefore [I. iv.] the base AB is equal to DE.\par
Again, since the angles ACB, DF E are [xx.] the halves of the equal angles\par
AOB, DHE, they are equal [I. Axiom vii.]. Therefore (Def. x.) the segments\par
ACB, DF E are similar, and their chords AB, DE have been proved equal;\par
therefore [xxiv.] the segments are equal. And taking these equals from the\par
whole circles, which are equal (hyp.), the remaining segments AGB, DKE are\par
equal. Hence the arcs AGB, DKE are equal.\par
2. The demonstration of this case is included in the foregoing.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If the opposite angles of a cyclic quadrilateral be equal, one of its\par
diagonals must be a diameter of the circumscribed circle.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash Parallel chords in a circle intercept equal arcs.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash If two chords intersect at any point within a circle, the sum of\par
the opposite arcs which they intercept is equal to the arc which parallel chords\par
intersecting on the circumference intercept. 2. If they intersect without the\par
circle, the difference of the arcs they intercept is equal to the arc which parallel\par
chords intersecting on the circumference intercept.\par
Cor. 4.\emdash If two chords intersect at right angles, the sum of the opposite arcs\par
which they intercept on the circle is a semicircle.\par
PROP. XXVII.\emdash Theorem.\par
In equal circles (ACB, DF E), angles at the centres (AOB, DHE), or at\par
the circumferences (ACB, DF E), which stand on equal arcs (AB, DE), are\par
equal.\par
Dem.\emdash If possible let one of\par
them, such as AOB, be greater\par
than the other, DHE; and suppose a part such as AOL to be\par
equal to DHE. Then since the\par
circles are equal, and the angles\par
AOL, DHE at the centres are\par
equal (hyp.), the arc AL is equal\par
to DE [xxvi.]; but AB is equal\par
to DE (hyp.). Hence AL is equal to AB\emdash that is, a part equal to the whole,\par
which is absurd. Therefore the angle AOB is equal to DHE.\par
88\par
2. The angles at the circumference, being the halves of the central angles, are\par
therefore equal.\par
PROP. XXVIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
In equal circles (ACB, DF E),\par
equal chords (AB, DE) divide the circumferences into arcs,\par
which are equal each to each\emdash\par
that is, the lesser to the lesser,\par
and the greater to the greater.\par
Dem.\emdash If the equal chords be\par
diameters, the Proposition is evident. If not, let O, H be the centres. Join AO, OB, DH, HE; then because the circles are equal their radii are\par
equal (Def. i.). Hence the two triangles AOB, DHE have the sides AO, OB\par
in one respectively equal to the sides DH, HE in the other, and the base AB\par
is equal to DE (hyp.). Therefore [I. viii.] the angle AOB is equal to DHE.\par
Hence the arc AGB is equal to DKE [xxvi.]; and since the whole circumference\par
AGBC is equal to the whole circumference DKEF, the remaining arc ACB is\par
equal to the remaining arc DF E.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The line joining the feet of perpendiculars from any point in the circumference of a\par
circle, on two diameters given in position, is given in magnitude.\par
2. If a line of given length slide between two lines given in position, the locus of the\par
intersection of perpendiculars to the given lines at its extremities is a circle. (This is the\par
converse of 1.)\par
PROP. XXIX.\emdash Theorem.\par
In equal circles (ACB, DF E), equal arcs (AGB, DCK) are subtended by\par
equal chords.\par
Dem.\emdash Let O, H be the centres (see last fig.). Join AO, OB, DH, HE;\par
then because the circles are equal, the angles AOB, DHE at the centres, which\par
stand on the equal arcs AGB, DKE, are equal [xxvii.]. Again, because the\par
triangles AOB, DHE have the two sides AO, OB in one respectively equal to\par
the two sides DH, HE in the other, and the angle AOB equal to the angle\par
DHE, the base AB of one is equal to the base DE of the other.\par
Observation.\emdash Since the two circles in the four last Propositions are equal, they are congruent figures, and the truth of the Propositions is evident by superposition.\par
89\par
PROP. XXX.\emdash Problem.\par
To bisect a given arc ACB.\par
Sol.\emdash Draw the chord AB; bisect it in D; erect DC at right angles to AB,\par
meeting the arc in C; then the arc is bisected in C.\par
Dem.\emdash Join AC, BC. Then the triangles\par
ADC, BDC have the side AD equal to DB\par
(const.), and DC common to both, and the angle ADC equal to the angle BDC, each being\par
right. Hence the base AC is equal to the base\par
BC. Therefore [xxviii.] the arc AC is equal to\par
the arc BC. Hence the arc AB is bisected in C.\par
Exercises.\par
1. ABCD is a semicircle whose diameter is AD; the chord BC produced meets AD\par
produced in E: prove that if CE is equal to the radius, the arc AB is equal to three times\par
CD.\par
2. The internal and the external bisectors of the vertical angle of a triangle inscribed in a\par
circle meet the circumference again in points equidistant from the extremities of the base.\par
3. If from A, one of the points of intersection of two given circles, two chords ACD, AC0D0\par
be drawn, cutting the circles in the points C, D; C0\par
, D0\par
, the triangles BCD, BC0D0\par
, formed\par
by joining these to the second point B of intersection of the circles, are equiangular.\par
4. If the vertical angle ACB of a triangle inscribed in a circle be bisected by a line CD,\par
which meets the circle again in D, and from D perpendiculars DE, DF be drawn to the sides,\par
one of which must be produced: prove that EA is equal to BF, and hence show that CE is\par
equal to half the sum of AC, BC.\par
PROP. XXXI.\emdash Theorem.\par
In a circle\emdash (1). The angle in a semicircle is a right angle. (2). The angle\par
in a segment greater than a semicircle is an acute angle. (3). The angle in a\par
segment less than a semicircle is an obtuse angle.\par
Dem.\emdash (1). Let AB be the diameter, C\par
any point in the semicircle. Join AC, CB.\par
The angle ACB is a right angle.\par
For let O be the centre. Join OC, and\par
produce AC to F. Then because AO is equal\par
to OC, the angle ACO is equal to the angle OAC. In like manner, the angle OCB is\par
equal to CBO. Hence the angle ACB is equal\par
to the sum of the two angles BAC, CBA; but\par
[I. xxxii.] the angle F CB is equal to the sum\par
of the two interior angles BAC, CBA of the\par
triangle ABC. Hence the angle ACB is equal\par
to its adjacent angle F CB, and therefore it\par
is a right angle [I. Def. xiii.].\par
90\par
(2). Let the arc ACE be greater than a semicircle. Join CE. Then the angle\par
ACE is evidently less than ACB; but ACB is right; therefore ACE is acute.\par
(3). Let the arc ACD be less than a semicircle; then evidently, from (1), the\par
angle ACD is obtuse.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If a parallelogram be inscribed in a circle, its diagonals intersect at\par
the centre of the circle.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash Find the centre of a circle by means of a carpenter\rquote s square.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash From a point outside a circle draw two tangents to the circle.\par
PROP. XXXII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (EF) be a tangent to a circle, and from the point of contact (A)\par
a chord (AC) be drawn cutting the circle, the angles made by this line with\par
the tangent are respectively equal to the angles in the alternate segments of the\par
circle.\par
Dem.\emdash (1). If the chord passes through\par
the centre, the Proposition is evident, for the\par
angles are right angles; but if not, from the\par
point of contact A draw AB at right angles\par
to the tangent. Join BC. Then because EF\par
is a tangent to the circle, and AB is drawn\par
from the point of contact perpendicular to\par
EF, AB passes through this centre [xix.].\par
Therefore the angle ACB is right [xxxi.].\par
Hence the sum of the two remaining angles\par
ABC, CAB is one right angle; but the angle\par
BAF is right (const.); therefore the sum of the angles ABC, BAC is equal to\par
BAF. Reject BAC, which is common, and we get the angle ABC equal to the\par
angle F AC.\par
(2). Take any point D in the arc AC. It is required to prove that the angle\par
CAE is equal to CDA.\par
Since the quadrilateral ABCD is cyclic, the\par
sum of the opposite angles ABC, CDA is two\par
right angles [xxii.], and therefore equal to the\par
sum of the angles F AC, CAE; but the angles\par
ABC, F AC are equal (1). Reject them, and we\par
get the angle CDA equal to CAE.\par
Or thus: Take any point G in the semicircle AGB. Join AG, GB, GC. Then the\par
angle AGB = F AB, each being right, and\par
CGB = CAB [xxi.]. Therefore the remaining angle AGC = F AC. Again, join BD, CD.\par
The angle BDA = BAE, each being right, and\par
CDB = CAB [xxi.]. Hence the angle CDA = CAE.\emdash Lardner.\par
91\par
Or by the method of limits, see Townsend\rquote s\par
Modern Geometry, vol. i., page 14.\par
The angle BAC is equal to BDC [xxi.]. Now\par
let the point B move until it becomes consecutive\par
to A; then AB will be a tangent, and BD will\par
coincide with AD, and the angle BDC with ADC.\par
Hence, if AX be a tangent at A, AC any chord,\par
the angle which the tangent makes with the chord\par
is equal to the angle in the alternate segment.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If two circles touch, any line drawn through the point of contact will cut off similar\par
segments.\par
2. If two circles touch, and any two lines be drawn through the point of contact, cutting\par
both circles again, the chord connecting their points of intersection with one circle is parallel\par
to the chord connecting their points of intersection with the other circle.\par
3. ACB is an arc of a circle, CE a tangent at C, meeting the chord AB produced in E,\par
and AD a perpendicular to AB in D: prove, if DE be bisected in C, that the arc AC = 2CB.\par
4. If two circles touch at a point A, and ABC be a chord through A, meeting the circles\par
in B and C: prove that the tangents at B and C are parallel to each other, and that when one\par
circle is within the other, the tangent at B meets the outer circle in two points equidistant\par
from C.\par
5. If two circles touch externally, their common tangent at either side subtends a right\par
angle at the point of contact, and its square is equal to the rectangle contained by their\par
diameters.\par
PROP. XXXIII.\emdash Problem.\par
On a given right line (AB) to describe a segment of a circle which shall\par
contain an angle equal to a given rectilineal angle (X).\par
Sol.\emdash If X be a right angle, describe a semicircle on the given line, and the\par
thing required is done; for the angle in a semicircle is a right angle.\par
If not, make with the given line AB the angle BAE equal to X. Erect AC\par
at right angles to AE, and BC at right angles to AB. On AC as diameter\par
describe a circle: it will be the circle required.\par
92\par
Dem.\emdash The circle on AC as diameter passes through B, since the angle\par
ABC is right [xxxi.] and touches AE, since the angle CAE is right [xvi.].\par
Therefore the angle BAE [xxxii.] is equal to the angle in the alternate segment;\par
but the angle BAE is equal to the angle X (const.). Therefore the angle X is\par
equal to the angle in the segment described on AB.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Construct a triangle, being given base, vertical angle, and any of the following data:\emdash 1.\par
Perpendicular. 2. The sum or difference of the sides. 3. Sum or difference of the squares of\par
the sides. 4. Side of the inscribed square on the base. 5. The median that bisects the base.\par
2. If lines be drawn from a fixed point to all the points of the circumference of a given\par
circle, the locus of all their points of bisection is a circle.\par
3. Given the base and vertical angle of a triangle, find the locus of the middle point of the\par
line joining the vertices of equilateral triangles described on the sides.\par
4. In the same case, find the loci of the angular points of a square described on one of the\par
sides.\par
PROP. XXXIV.\emdash Problem.\par
To cut off from a given circle (ABC) a segment which shall contain an angle\par
equal to a given angle (X).\par
Sol.\emdash Take any point A in the circumference. Draw the tangent AD, and make the\par
angle DAC equal to the given angle X. AC\par
will cut off the required segment.\par
Dem.\emdash Take any point B in the alternate segment. Join BA, BC. Then the angle\par
DAC is equal to ABC [xxxii.]; but DAC\par
is equal to X (const.). Therefore the angle\par
ABC is equal to X.\par
PROP. XXXV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two chords (AB, CD) of a circle intersect in a point (E) within the circle,\par
the rectangles (AE . EB, CE . ED) contained by the segments are equal.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. If the point of intersection be the\par
centre, each rectangle is equal to the square of the\par
radius. Hence they are equal.\par
2. Let one of the chords AB pass through the\par
centre O, and cut the other chord CD, which does\par
not pass through the centre, at right angles. Join\par
OC. Now because AB passes through the centre,\par
and cuts the other chord CD, which does not pass\par
through the centre at right angles, it bisects it [iii.].\par
Again, because AB is divided equally in O and unequally in E, the rectangle\par
93\par
AE . EB, together with OE2\par
, is equal to OB2\emdash that is, to OC2\par
[II. v.]; but\par
OC2\par
is equal to OE2 + EC2\par
[I. xlvii.] Therefore\par
AE . EB + OE2 = OE2 + EC2\par
.\par
Reject OE2\par
, which is common, and we have AE . EB = EC2\par
; but CE2\par
is equal\par
to the rectangle CE . ED, since CE is equal to ED. Therefore the rectangle\par
AE . EB is equal to the rectangle CE . ED.\par
3. Let AB pass through the centre, and cut CD,\par
which does not pass through the centre obliquely.\par
Let O be the centre. Draw OF perpendicular to\par
CD [I. xi.]. Join OC, OD. Then, since CD is cut at\par
right angles by OF, which passes through the centre,\par
it is bisected in F [iii.], and divided unequally in E.\par
Hence\par
CE . ED + F E2 = F D2\par
[II. v.],\par
and OF2 = OF2\par
.\par
Hence, adding, since F E2 + OF2 = OE2\par
[I. xlvii.], and F D2 + OF2 = OD2\par
,\par
we get\par
CE . ED + OE2 = OD or OB2\par
.\par
Again, since AB is bisected in O and divided unequally in E,\par
AE . EB + OE2 = OB2\par
[II. v.].\par
Therefore CE . ED + OE2 = AE . EB + OE2\par
.\par
Hence CE . ED = AE . EB.\par
4. Let neither chord pass through the centre.\par
Through the point E, where they intersect, draw\par
the diameter F G. Then by 3, the rectangle F E . EG\par
is equal to the rectangle AE . EB, and also to the\par
rectangle CE . ED. Hence the rectangle AE . EB is\par
equal to the rectangle CE . ED.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If a chord of a circle be divided in any\par
point within the circle, the rectangle contained by\par
its segments is equal to the difference between the\par
square of the radius and the square of the line drawn\par
from the centre to the point of section.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If the rectangle contained by the segments of one of two intersecting\par
lines be equal to the rectangle contained by the segments of the other, the four\par
extremities are concyclic.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash If two triangles be equiangular, the rectangle contained by the noncorresponding sides about any two equal angles are equal.\par
94\par
Let ABO, DCO be the equiangular triangles, and\par
let them be placed so that the equal angles at O may\par
be vertically opposite, and that the non-corresponding\par
sides AO, CO may be in one line; then the noncorresponding sides BO, OD shall be in one line. Now,\par
since the angle ABD is equal to ACD, the points A, B,\par
C, D are concyclic [xxi., Cor. 1]. Hence the rectangle\par
AO . OC is equal to the rectangle BO . OD [xxxv.].\par
Exercises.\par
1. In any triangle, the rectangle contained by two sides is equal to the rectangle contained\par
by the perpendicular on the third side and the diameter of the circumscribed circle.\par
Def.\emdash The supplement of an arc is the difference between it and a semicircle.\par
2. The rectangle contained by the chord of an arc and the chord of its supplement is equal\par
to the rectangle contained by the radius and the chord of twice the supplement.\par
3. If the base of a triangle be given, and the sum of the sides, the rectangle contained by\par
the perpendiculars from the extremities of the base on the external bisector of the vertical\par
angle is given.\par
4. If the base and the difference of the sides be given, the rectangle contained by the\par
perpendiculars from the extremities of the base on the internal bisector is given.\par
5. Through one of the points of intersection of two circles draw a secant, so that the\par
rectangle contained by the intercepted chords may be given, or a maximum.\par
6. If the sum of two arcs, AC, CB of a circle\par
be less than a semicircle, the rectangle AC . CB contained by their chords is equal to the rectangle contained by the radius, and the excess of the chord of\par
the supplement of their difference above the chord of\par
the supplement of their sum.\emdash Catalan.\par
Dem.\emdash Draw DE, the diameter which is perpendicular to AB, and draw the chords CF, BG parallel to DE. Now it is evident that the difference between the arcs AC, CB is equal to 2CD, and therefore\par
= CD +EF. Hence the arc CBF is the supplement of\par
the difference, and CF is the chord of that supplement.\par
Again, since the angle ABG is right, the arc ABG is a\par
semicircle. Hence BG is the supplement of the sum of\par
the arcs AC, CB; therefore the line BG is the chord of\par
the supplement of the sum. Now (Ex. 1), the rectangle\par
AC . CB is equal to the rectangle contained by the diameter and CI, and therefore equal to\par
the rectangle contained by the radius and 2CI; but the difference between CF and BG is\par
evidently equal to 2CI. Hence the rectangle AC . CB is equal to the rectangle contained by\par
the radius and the difference between the chords CF, BG.\par
7. If we join AF, BF we find, as before, the rectangle AF . F B equal to the rectangle\par
contained by the radius and 2F I\emdash that is, equal to the rectangle contained by the radius\par
and the sum of CF and BG. Hence\emdash If the sum of two arcs of a circle be greater than a\par
semicircle, the rectangle contained by their chords is equal to the rectangle contained by the\par
radius, and the sum of the chords of the supplements of their sum and their difference.\par
8. Through a given point draw a transversal cutting two lines given in position, so that\par
the rectangle contained by the segments intercepted between it and the line may be given.\par
95\par
PROP. XXXVI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If from any point (P) without a circle two lines be drawn to it, one of which\par
(P T) is a tangent, and the other (P A) a secant, the rectangle (AP, BP) contained by the segments of the secant is equal to the square of the tangent.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let P A pass through the\par
centre O. Join OT. Then because AB\par
is bisected in O and divided externally\par
in P, the rectangle AP . BP + OB2\par
is\par
equal to OP2\par
[II. vi.]. But since P T is a\par
tangent, and OT drawn from the centre\par
to the point of contact, the angle OT P is\par
right [xviii.]. Hence OT2 +P T2\par
is equal\par
to OP2\par
.\par
Therefore AP . BP + OB2 = OT2 + P T2\par
;\par
but OB2 = OT2\par
.\par
Hence the rectangle AP . BP = P T2\par
.\par
2. If AB does not pass through the\par
centre O, let fall the perpendicular OC\par
on AB. Join OT, OB, OP. Then because OC, a line through the centre,\par
cuts AB, which does not pass through\par
the centre at right angles, it bisects it\par
[iii.]. Hence, since AB is bisected in C\par
and divided externally in P, the rectangle\par
AP . BP + CB2 = CP2\par
[II. vi.];\par
and OC2 = OC2\par
.\par
Hence, adding, since CB2 + OC2 = OB2\par
[I. xlvii.], and CP2 + OC2 = OP2\par
,\par
we get\par
rectangle AP . BP + OB2 = OP2\par
;\par
but OT2 + P T2 = OP2\par
[I. xlvii.].\par
Therefore AP . BP + OB2 = OT2 + P T2\par
;\par
and rejecting the equals OB2 and OT2\par
, we have the rectangle\par
AP . BP = P T2\par
.\par
The two Propositions xxxv., xxxvi., may be included in one enunciation, as follows:\emdash The\par
rectangle AP . BP contained by the segments of any chord of a given circle passing through\par
a fixed point P, either within or without the circle, is constant. For let O be the centre: join\par
96\par
OA, OB, OP. Then OAB is an isosceles triangle, and OP is a line drawn from its vertex to a\par
point P in the base, or base produced. Then the rectangle AP . BP is equal to the difference\par
of the squares of OB and OP, and is therefore constant.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If two lines AB, CD produced meet in P, and if the rectangle\par
AP . BP = CP . DP, the points A, B, C, D are concyclic (compare xxxv.,\par
Cor. 2).\par
Cor. 2.\emdash Tangents to two circles from any point in their common chord are\par
equal (compare xvii., Ex. 6).\par
Cor. 3.\emdash The common chords of any three intersecting circles are concurrent\par
(compare xvii., Ex. 7).\par
Exercise.\par
If from the vertex A of a 4 ABC, AD be drawn, meeting CB produced in D, and making\par
the angle BAD = ACB, prove DB . DC = DA2\par
.\par
PROP. XXXVII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If the rectangle (AP . BP) contained by the segments of a secant, drawn from\par
any point (P) without a circle, be equal to the square of a line (P T) drawn from\par
the same point to meet the circle, the line which meets the circle is a tangent.\par
Dem.\emdash From P draw P Q touching the circle [xvii.]. Let O be the\par
centre. Join OP, OQ, OT. Now\par
the rectangle AP . BP is equal to the\par
square on P T (hyp.), and equal to\par
the square on P Q [xxxvi.]. Hence\par
P T2\par
is equal to P Q2\par
, and therefore\par
P T is equal to P Q. Again, the triangles OT P, OQP have the side OT\par
equal OQ, T P equal QP, and the\par
base OP common; hence [I. viii.] the angle OT P is equal to OQP; but OQP is\par
a right angle, since P Q is a tangent [xviii.]; hence OT P is right, and therefore\par
[xvi.] P T is a tangent.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Describe a circle passing through two given points, and fulfilling either of the following\par
conditions: 1, touching a given line; 2, touching a given circle.\par
2. Describe a circle through a given point, and touching two given lines; or touching a\par
given file and a given circle.\par
3. Describe a circle passing through a given point, having its centre on a given line and\par
touching a given circle.\par
4. Describe a circle through two given points, and intercepting a given arc on a given\par
circle.\par
5. A, B, C, D are four collinear points, and EF is a common tangent to the circles\par
described upon AB, CD as diameters: prove that the triangles AEB, CF D are equiangular.\par
6. The diameter of the circle inscribed in a right-angled triangle is equal to half the sum of\par
the diameters of the circles touching the hypotenuse, the perpendicular from the right angle\par
of the hypotenuse, and the circle described about the right-angled triangle.\par
97\par
Questions for Examination on Book III.\par
1. What is the subject-matter of Book III.?\par
2. Define equal circles.\par
3. What is the difference between a chord and a secant?\par
4. When does a secant become a tangent?\par
5. What is the difference between a segment of a circle and a sector?\par
6. What is meant by an angle in a segment?\par
7. If an arc of a circle be one-sixth of the whole circumference, what is the magnitude of\par
the angle in it?\par
8. What are linear segments?\par
9. What is meant by an angle standing on a segment?\par
10. What are concyclic points?\par
11. What is a cyclic quadrilateral?\par
12. How many intersections can a line and a circle have?\par
13. What does the line become when the points of intersection become consecutive?\par
14. How many points of intersection can two circles have?\par
15. What is the reason that if two circles touch they cannot have any other common point?\par
16. Give one enunciation that will include Propositions xi., xii. of Book III.\par
17. What Proposition is this a limiting case of?\par
18. Explain the extended meaning of the word angle.\par
19. What is Euclid\rquote s limit of an angle?\par
20. State the relations between Propositions xvi., xviii., xix.\par
21. What Propositions are these limiting cases of?\par
22. How many common tangents can two circles have?\par
23. What is the magnitude of the rectangle of the segments of a chord drawn through a\par
point 3.65 metres distant from the centre of a circle whose radius is 4.25 metres?\par
24. The radii of two circles are 4.25 and 1.75 feet respectively, and the distance between\par
their centres 6.5 feet; find the lengths of their direct and their transverse common tangents.\par
25. If a point be h feet outside the circumference of a circle whose diameter is 7920 miles,\par
prove that the length of the tangent drawn from it to the circle is r\par
3h\par
2\par
miles.\par
26. Two parallel chords of a circle are 12 perches and 16 perches respectively, and their\par
distance asunder is 2 perches; find the length of the diameter.\par
27. What is the locus of the centres of all circles touching a given circle in a given point?\par
28. What is the condition that must be fulfilled that four points may be concyclic?\par
29. If the angle in a segment of a circle be a right angle and a-half, what part of the whole\par
circumference is it?\par
30. Mention the converse Propositions of Book III. which are proved directly.\par
31. What is the locus of the middle points of equal chords in a circle?\par
32. The radii of two circles are 6 and 8, and the distance between their centres 10; find\par
the length of their common chord.\par
33. If a figure of any even number of sides be inscribed in a circle, prove that the sum of\par
one set of alternate angles is equal to the sum of the remaining angles.\par
Exercises on Book III.\par
1. If two chords of a circle intersect at right angles, the sum of the squares on their\par
segments is equal to the square on the diameter.\par
2. If a chord of a given circle subtend a right angle at a fixed point, the rectangle of the\par
perpendiculars on it from the fixed point and from the centre of the given circle is constant.\par
Also the sum of the squares of perpendiculars on it from two other fixed points (which may\par
be found) is constant.\par
3. If through either of the points of intersection of two equal circles any line be drawn\par
meeting them again in two points, these points are equally distant from the other intersection\par
of the circles.\par
98\par
4. Draw a tangent to a given circle so that the triangle formed by it and two fixed tangents\par
to the circle shall be\emdash 1, a maximum; 2, a minimum.\par
5. If through the points of intersection A, B of two circles any two lines ACD, BEF be\par
drawn parallel to each other, and meeting the circles again in C, D, E, F; then CD = EF.\par
6. In every triangle the bisector of the greatest angle is the least of the three bisectors of\par
the angles.\par
7. The circles whose diameters are the four sides of any cyclic quadrilateral intersect again\par
in four concyclic points.\par
8. The four angular points of a cyclic quadrilateral determine four triangles whose orthocentres (the intersections of their perpendiculars) form an equal quadrilateral.\par
9. If through one of the points of intersection of two circles we draw two common chords,\par
the lines joining the extremities of these chords make a given angle with each other.\par
10. The square on the perpendicular from any point in the circumference of a circle, on\par
the chord of contact of two tangents, is equal to the rectangle of the perpendiculars from the\par
same point on the tangents.\par
11. Find a point in the circumference of a given circle, the sum of the squares on whose\par
distances from two given points may be a maximum or a minimum.\par
12. Four circles are described on the sides of a quadrilateral as diameters. The common\par
chord of any two on adjacent sides is parallel to the common chord of the remaining two.\par
13. The rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from any point in a circle, on the diagonals of an inscribed quadrilateral, is equal to the rectangle contained by the perpendiculars\par
from the same point on either pair of opposite sides.\par
14. The rectangle contained by the sides of a triangle is greater than the square on the\par
internal bisector of the vertical angle, by the rectangle contained by the segments of the base.\par
15. If through A, one of the points of intersection of two circles, we draw any line ABC,\par
cutting the circles again in B and C, the tangents at B and C intersect at a given angle.\par
16. If a chord of a given circle pass through a given point, the locus of the intersection of\par
tangents at its extremities is a right line.\par
17. The rectangle contained by the distances of the point where the internal bisector of the\par
vertical angle meets the base, and the point where the perpendicular from the vertex meets\par
it from the middle point of the base, is equal to the square on half the difference of the sides.\par
18. State and prove the Proposition analogous to 17 for the external bisector of the vertical\par
angle.\par
19. The square on the external diagonal of a cyclic quadrilateral is equal to the sum of\par
the squares on the tangents from its extremities to the circumscribed circle.\par
20. If a variable circle touch a given circle and a given line, the chord of contact passes\par
through a given point.\par
21. If A, B, C be three points in the circumference of a circle, and D, E the middle points\par
of the arcs AB, AC; then if the line DE intersect the chords AB, AC in the points F, G, AF\par
is equal to AG.\par
22. Given two circles, O, O0\par
; then if any secant cut O in the points B, C, and O0\par
in the\par
points B0\par
, C0\par
, and another secant cuts them in the points D, E; D0\par
, E0\par
respectively; the four\par
chords BD, CE, B0D0\par
, C0E0\par
form a cyclic quadrilateral.\par
23. If a cyclic quadrilateral be such that a circle can be inscribed in it, the lines joining\par
the points of contact are perpendicular to each other.\par
24. If through the point of intersection of the diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral the\par
minimum chord be drawn, that point will bisect the part of the chord between the opposite\par
sides of the quadrilateral.\par
25. Given the base of a triangle, the vertical angle, and either the internal or the external\par
bisector at the vertical angle; construct it.\par
26. If through the middle point A of a given arc BAC we draw any chord AD, cutting\par
BC in E, the rectangle AD . AE is constant.\par
27. The four circles circumscribing the four triangles formed by any four lines pass through\par
a common point.\par
28. If X, Y , Z be any three points on the three sides of a triangle ABC, the three circles\par
about the triangles Y AZ, ZBX, XCY pass through a common point.\par
99\par
29. If the position of the common point in the last question be given, the three angles of\par
the triangle XY Z are given, and conversely.\par
30. Place a given triangle so that its three sides shall pass through three given points.\par
31. Place a given triangle so that its three vertices shall lie on three given lines.\par
32. Construct the greatest triangle equiangular to a given one whose sides shall pass\par
through three given points.\par
33. Construct the least triangle equiangular to a given one whose vertices shall lie on three\par
given lines.\par
34. Construct the greatest triangle equiangular to a given one whose sides shall touch\par
three given circles.\par
35. If two sides of a given triangle pass through fixed points, the third touches a fixed\par
circle.\par
36. If two sides of a given triangle touch fixed circles, the third touches a fixed circle.\par
37. Construct an equilateral triangle having its vertex at a given point, and the extremities\par
of its base on a given circle.\par
38. Construct an equilateral triangle having its vertex at a given point, and the extremities\par
of its base on two given circles.\par
39. Place a given triangle so that its three sides shall touch three given circles.\par
40. Circumscribe a square about a given quadrilateral.\par
41. Inscribe a square in a given quadrilateral.\par
42. Describe circles\emdash (1) orthogonal (cutting at right angles) to a given circle and passing\par
through two given points; (2) orthogonal to two others, and passing through a given point;\par
(3) orthogonal to three others.\par
43. If from the extremities of a diameter AB of a semicircle two chords AD, BE be drawn,\par
meeting in C, AC . AD + BC . BE = AB2\par
.\par
44. If ABCD be a cyclic quadrilateral, and if we describe any circle passing through the\par
points A and B, another through B and C, a third through C and D, and a fourth through\par
D and A; these circles intersect successively in four other points E, F, G, H, forming another\par
cyclic quadrilateral.\par
45. If ABC be an equilateral triangle, what is the locus of the point M, if MA = MB +\par
MC?\par
46. In a triangle, given the sum or the difference of two sides and the angle formed by\par
these sides both in magnitude and position, the locus of the centre of the circumscribed circle\par
is a right line.\par
47. Describe a circle\emdash (1) through two given points which shall bisect the circumference\par
of a given circle; (2) through one given point which shall bisect the circumference of two given\par
circles.\par
48. Find the locus of the centre of a circle which bisects the circumferences of two given\par
circles.\par
49. Describe a circle which shall bisect the circumferences of three given circles.\par
50. AB is a diameter of a circle; AC, AD are two chords meeting the tangent at B in the\par
points E, F respectively: prove that the points C, D, E, F are concyclic.\par
51. CD is a perpendicular from any point C in a semicircle on the diameter AB; EF G is\par
a circle touching DB in E, CD in F, and the semicircle in G; prove\emdash (1) that the points A,\par
F, G are collinear; (2) that AC = AE.\par
52. Being given an obtuse-angled triangle, draw from the obtuse angle to the opposite\par
side a line whose square shall be equal to the rectangle contained by the segments into which\par
it divides the opposite side.\par
53. O is a point outside a circle whose centre is E; two perpendicular lines passing through\par
O intercept chords AB, CD on the circle; then AB2 + CD2 + 4OE2 = 8R2\par
.\par
54. The sum of the squares on the sides of a triangle is equal to twice the sum of the\par
rectangles contained by each perpendicular and the portion of it comprised between the corresponding vertex and the orthocentre; also equal to 12R2 minus the sum of the squares of\par
the distances of the orthocentre from the vertices.\par
55. If two circles touch in C, and if D be any point outside the circles at which their radii\par
through C subtend equal angles, if DE, DF be tangent from D, DE . DF = DC2\par
.\par
100\par
BOOK IV.\par
INSCRIPTION AND CIRCUMSCRIPTION OF TRIANGLES\par
AND OF REGULAR POLYGONS IN AND ABOUT CIRCLES\par
DEFINITIONS.\par
i. If two rectilineal figures be so related that the angular points of one lie\par
on the sides of the other\emdash 1, the former is said to be inscribed in the latter; 2,\par
the latter is said to be described about the former.\par
ii. A rectilineal figure is said to be inscribed in a circle when its angular\par
points are on the circumference. Reciprocally, a rectilineal figure is said to be\par
circumscribed to a circle when each side touches the circle.\par
iii. A circle is said to be inscribed in a rectilineal figure when it touches\par
each side of the figure. Reciprocally, a circle is said to be circumscribed to a\par
rectilineal figure when it passes through each angular point of the figure.\par
iv. A rectilineal figure which is both equilateral and equiangular is said to\par
be regular.\par
Observation.\emdash The following summary of the contents of the Fourth Book will assist the\par
student in remembering it:\emdash\par
1. It contains sixteen Propositions, of which four relate to triangles, four to squares, four\par
to pentagons, and four miscellaneous Propositions.\par
2. Of the four Propositions occupied with triangles\emdash\par
(\f3\'e1) One is to inscribe a triangle in a circle.\par
(\'e2) Its reciprocal, to describe a triangle about a circle.\par
(\'e3) To inscribe a circle in a triangle.\par
(\'e4) Its reciprocal, to describe a circle about a triangle.\par
3. If we substitute in (\'e1), (\'e2), (\'e3), (\'e4) squares for triangles, and pentagons for triangles,\par
we have the problems for squares and pentagons respectively.\par
4. Every Proposition in the fourth Book is a problem.\par
PROP. I.\f1\emdash Problem.\par
In a given circle (ABC) to place a chord equal to a given line (D) not greater\par
than the diameter.\par
Sol.\emdash Draw any diameter AC of\par
the circle; then, if AC be equal to\par
D, the thing required is done; if not,\par
from AC cut off the part AE equal\par
to D [I. iii.]; and with A as centre\par
and AE as radius, describe the circle EBF, cutting the circle ABC in\par
the points B, F. Join AB. Then\par
AB is the chord required.\par
101\par
Dem.\emdash Because A is the centre of the circle EBF, AB is equal to AE\par
[I. Def. xxxii.]; but AE is equal to D (const.); therefore AB is equal to D.\par
PROP. II.\emdash Problem.\par
In a given circle (ABC) to inscribe a triangle equiangular to a given triangle\par
(DEF).\par
Sol.\emdash Take any point A in the circumference, and at it draw the tangent GH; then make the angle HAC\par
equal to E, and GAB equal to F\par
[I. xxiii.] Join BC. ABC is a triangle fulfilling the required conditions.\par
Dem.\emdash The angle E is equal to\par
HAC (const.), and HAC is equal to\par
the angle ABC in the alternate segment [III. xxxii.]. Hence the angle E is equal to ABC. In like manner the\par
angle F is equal to ACB. Therefore [I. xxxii.] the remaining angle D is equal\par
to BAC. Hence the triangle ABC inscribed in the given circle is equiangular to\par
DEF.\par
PROP. III.\emdash Problem.\par
About a given circle (ABC) to describe a triangle equiangular to a given\par
triangle (DEF).\par
Sol.\emdash Produce any side DE of the given triangle both ways to G and H,\par
and from the centre O of the circle draw any radius OA; make the angle AOB\par
equal to GEF [I. xxiii.], and the angle AOC equal to HDF. At the points A,\par
B, C draw the tangents LM, MN, NL to the given circle. LMN is a triangle\par
fulfilling the required conditions.\par
102\par
Dem.\emdash Because AM touches the circle at A, the angle OAM is right. In\par
like manner, the angle MBO is right; but the sum of the four angles of the\par
quadrilateral OAMB is equal to four right angles. Therefore the sum of the\par
two remaining angles AOB, AMB is two right angles; and [I. xiii.] the sum\par
of the two angles GEF, F ED is two right angles. Therefore the sum of AOB,\par
AMB is equal to the sum of GEF, F ED; but AOB is equal to GEF (const.).\par
Hence AMB is equal to F ED. In like manner, ALC is equal to EDF; therefore\par
[I. xxxii.] the remaining angle BNC is equal to DF E. Hence the triangle LMN\par
is equiangular to DEF.\par
PROP. IV.\emdash Problem.\par
To inscribe a circle in a given triangle (ABC).\par
Sol.\emdash Bisect any two angles A, B of the given triangle by the lines AO, BO;\par
then O, their point of intersection, is the centre of the required circle.\par
Dem.\emdash From O let fall the perpendiculars\par
OD, OE, OF on the sides of the triangle. Now,\par
in the triangles OAE, OAF the angle OAE is\par
equal to OAF (const.), and the angle AEO equal\par
to AF O, because each is right, and the side OA\par
common. Hence [I. xxvi.] the side OE is equal\par
to OF. In like manner OD is equal to OF; therefore the three lines OD, OE, OF are all equal.\par
And the circle described with O as centre and\par
OD as radius will pass through the points E, F;\par
and since the angles D, E, F are right, it will\par
[III. xvi.] touch the three sides of the triangle ABC; and therefore the circle\par
DEF is inscribed in the triangle ABC.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If the points O, C be joined, the angle C\par
is bisected. Hence \ldblquote the bisectors of the angles\par
of a triangle are concurrent\rdblquote  (compare I. xxvi.,\par
Ex. 7).\par
2. If the sides BC, CA, AB of the triangle\par
ABC be denoted by a, b, c, and half their sum by\par
s, the distances of the vertices A, B, C of the triangle from the points of contact of the inscribed\par
circle are respectively s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 a, s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b, s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c.\par
3. If the external angles of the triangle ABC\par
be bisected as in the annexed diagram, the three\par
angular points O0\par
, O00\par
, O000, of the triangle\par
formed by the three bisectors will be the centres\par
of three circles, each touching one side externally,\par
and the other two produced. These three circles are called the escribed circles of the triangle\par
ABC.\par
4. The distances of the vertices A, B, C from\par
the points of contact of the escribed circle which\par
touches AB externally are s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b, s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 a, s.\par
103\par
5. The centre of the inscribed circle, the centre of each escribed circle, and two of the\par
angular points of the triangle, are concyclic. Also any two of the escribed centres are concyclic\par
with the corresponding two of the angular points of the triangle.\par
6. Of the four points O, O0\par
, O00\par
, O000, any one is the orthocentre of the triangle formed\par
by the remaining three.\par
7. The three triangles BCO0\par
, CAO00\par
, ABO000 are equiangular.\par
8. The rectangle CO . CO000 = ab; AO . AO0 = bc; BO . BO00 = ca.\par
9. Since the whole triangle ABC is made up of the three triangles AOB, BOC, COA, we\par
see that the rectangle contained by the sum of the three sides, and the radius of the inscribed\par
circle, is equal to twice the area of the triangle. Hence, if r denote the radius of the inscribed\par
circle, rs = area of the triangle.\par
10. If r\par
0 denote the radius of the escribed circle which touches the side a externally, it\par
may be shown in like manner that r\par
0\par
(s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 a) = area of the triangle.\par
11. rr0 = s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b . s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c.\par
12. Square of area = s . s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 a . s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b . s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c.\par
13. Square of area = r . r0\par
. r00 . r000\par
.\par
14. If the triangle ABC be right-angled, having the angle C right,\par
r = s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c; r\par
0 = s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b; r\par
00 = s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 a; r\par
000 = s.\par
15. Given the base of a triangle, the vertical angle, and the radius of the inscribed, or any\par
of the escribed circles: construct it.\par
PROP. V.\f1\emdash Problem.\par
To describe a circle about a given triangle (ABC).\par
Sol.\emdash Bisect any two sides BC, AC in the points\par
D, E. Erect DO, EO at right angles to BC, CA;\par
then O, the point of intersection of the perpendiculars, is the centre of the required circle.\par
Dem.\emdash Join OA, OB, OC. The triangles BDO,\par
CDO have the side BD equal CD (const.), and DO\par
common, and the angle BDO equal to the angle\par
CDO, because each is right. Hence [I. iv.] BO is\par
equal to OC. In like manner AO is equal to OC.\par
Therefore the three lines AO, BO, CO are equal,\par
and the circle described with O as centre, and OA as radius, will pass through\par
the points A, B, C, and be described about the triangle ABC.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash Since the perpendicular from O on AB bisects it [III. iii.], we\par
see that the perpendiculars at the middle points of the sides of a triangle are\par
concurrent.\par
Def.\emdash The circle ABC is called the circumcircle, its radius the circumradius, and its centre the circumcentre of the triangle.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The three perpendiculars of a triangle (ABC) are concurrent.\par
104\par
Dem.\emdash Describe a circle about the triangle. Let fall the\par
perpendicular CF. Produce CF to meet the circle in G. Make\par
F O = F G. Join AG, AO. Produce AO to meet BC in D.\par
Then the triangles GF A, OF A have the sides GF, F A in one\par
equal to the sides OF, F A in the other, and the contained\par
angles equal. Hence [I. iv.] the angle GAF equal OAF; but\par
GAF = GCB [III. xxi.]; hence OAF = OCD, and F OA =\par
DOC; hence OF A = ODC; but OF A is right, hence ODC is\par
right. In like manner, if BO be joined to meet AC in E, BE\par
will be perpendicular to AC. Hence the three perpendiculars\par
pass through O, and are concurrent. This Proposition may be proved simply as follows:\emdash\par
Draw parallels to the sides of the original triangle ABC through its vertices, forming a new\par
triangle A0B0C0 described about ABC; then the\par
three perpendiculars at the middle points of the\par
sides of A0B0C0 are concurrent [v. Cor. 1], and\par
these are evidently the perpendiculars from the\par
vertices on the opposite sides of the triangle ABC\par
(compare Ex. 16, Book I.).\par
Def.\emdash The point O is called the orthocentre of\par
the triangle ABC.\par
2. The three rectangles OA . OP, OB . OQ,\par
OC . OR are equal.\par
Def.\emdash The circle round O as centre, the\par
square of whose radius is equal OA . OP = OB . OQ = OC . OR, is called the polar circle\par
of the triangle ABC.\par
Observation.\emdash If the orthocentre of the triangle ABC be within the triangle, the rectangles\par
OA . OP, OB . OQ, OC . OR are negative, because the lines OA . OP, &c., are measured in\par
opposite directions, and have contrary signs; hence the polar circle is imaginary; but it is real\par
when the point O is without the triangle\emdash that is, when the triangle has an obtuse angle.\par
3. If the perpendiculars of a triangle be produced to meet the circumscribed circle, the\par
intercepts between the orthocentre and the circle are bisected by the sides of the triangle.\par
4. The point of bisection (I) of the line (OP)\par
joining the orthocentre (O) to the circumference (P)\par
of any triangle is equally distant from the feet of the\par
perpendiculars, from the middle points of the sides,\par
and from the middle points of the distances of the\par
vertices from the orthocentre.\par
Dem.\emdash Draw the perpendicular P H; then,\par
since OF, P H are perpendiculars on AB, and OP is\par
bisected in I, it is easy to see that IH = IF. Again,\par
since OP, OG are bisected in I, F; IF = 1\par
2\par
P G\emdash\par
that is, IF = 1\par
2\par
the radius. Hence the distance of I\par
from the foot of each perpendicular, and from the\par
middle point of each side, is = 1\par
2\par
the radius. In like\par
manner, if OC be bisected in K, then IK = 1\par
2\par
the\par
radius. Hence we have the following theorem:\emdash The\par
nine points made up of the feet of the perpendiculars, the middle points of the sides, and the middle points of the lines from the vertices to\par
the orthocentre, are concyclic.\par
Def.\emdash The circle through these nine points is called the \ldblquote nine points circle\rdblquote  of the triangle.\par
5. The circumcircle of a triangle is the \ldblquote nine points circle\rdblquote  of each of the four triangles\par
formed by joining the centres of the inscribed and escribed circles.\par
6. The distances between the vertices of a triangle and its orthocentre are respectively the\par
doubles of the perpendiculars from the circumcentre on the sides.\par
7. The radius of the \ldblquote nine points circle\rdblquote  of a triangle is equal to half its circumradius.\par
105\par
PROP. VI.\emdash Problem.\par
In a given circle (ABCD) to inscribe a square.\par
Sol.\emdash Draw any two diameters AC, BD at\par
right angles to each other. Join AB, BC, CD,\par
DA. ABCD is a square.\par
Dem.\emdash Let O be the centre. Then the\par
four angles at O, being right angles, are equal.\par
Hence the arcs on which they stand are equal\par
[III. xxvi.], and hence the four chords are equal\par
[III. xxix.]. Therefore the figure ABCD is equilateral.\par
Again, because AC is a diameter, the angle\par
ABC is right [III. xxxi.]. In like manner the remaining angles are right. Hence\par
ABCD is a square.\par
PROP. VII.\emdash Problem.\par
About a given circle (ABCD) to describe a square.\par
Sol.\emdash Through the centre O draw any two diameters at right angles to each\par
other, and draw at the points A, B, C, D the lines HE, EF, F G, GH touching\par
the circle. EF GH is a square.\par
Dem.\emdash Because AE touches the circle at A,\par
the angle EAO is right [III. xviii.], and therefore\par
equal to BOC, which is right (const.). Hence AE\par
is parallel to OB. In like manner EB is parallel\par
to AO; and since AO is equal to OB, the figure\par
AOBE is a lozenge, and the angle AOB is right;\par
hence AOBE is a square. In like manner each of\par
the figures BC, CD, DA is a square. Hence the\par
whole figure is a square.\par
Cor.\emdash The circumscribed square is double of\par
the inscribed square.\par
PROP. VIII.\emdash Problem.\par
In a given square (ABCD) to inscribe a circle.\par
Sol.\emdash Bisect (see last diagram) two adjacent sides EH, EF in the points A,\par
B, and through A, B draw the lines AC, BD, respectively parallel to EF, EH;\par
then O, the point of intersection of these parallels, is the centre of the required\par
circle.\par
Dem.\emdash Because AOBE is a parallelogram, its opposite sides are equal;\par
therefore AO is equal to EB; but EB is half the side of the given square;\par
106\par
therefore AO is equal to half the side of the given square; and so in like manner\par
is each of the lines OB, OC, OD; therefore the four lines OA, OB, OC, OD\par
are all equal; and since they are perpendicular to the sides of the given square,\par
the circle described with O as centre, and OA as radius, will be inscribed in the\par
square.\par
PROP. IX.\emdash Problem.\par
About a given square (ABCD) to describe a circle.\par
Sol.\emdash Draw the diagonals AC, BD intersecting in O (see diagram to Proposition vi.). O is the centre of the required circle.\par
Dem.\emdash Since ABC is an isosceles triangle, and the angle B is right, each\par
of the other angles is half a right angle; therefore BAO is half a right angle.\par
In like manner ABO is half a right angle; hence the angle BAO equal ABO;\par
therefore [I. vi.] AO is equal to OB. In like manner OB is equal to OC, and\par
OC to OD. Hence the circle described, with O as centre and OA as radius, will\par
pass through the points B, C, D, and be described about the square.\par
PROP. X.\emdash Problem.\par
To construct an isosceles triangle having each base angle double the vertical\par
angle.\par
Sol.\emdash Take any line AB. Divide it in C,\par
so that the rectangle AB . BC shall be equal to\par
AC2\par
[II. xi.]. With A as centre, and AB as\par
radius, describe the circle BDE, and in it place\par
the chord BD equal to AC [i.]. Join AD. ADB\par
is a triangle fulfilling the required conditions.\par
Dem.\emdash Join CD. About the triangle ACD\par
describe the circle CDE [v.]. Then, because\par
the rectangle AB . BC is equal to AC2\par
(const.),\par
and that AC is equal to BD (const.); therefore\par
the rectangle AB . BC is equal to BD2\par
. Hence\par
[III. xxxii.] BD touches the circle ACD. Hence the angle BDC is equal to the\par
angle A in the alternate segment [III. xxxii.]. To each add CDA, and we have\par
the angle BDA equal to the sum of the angles CDA and A; but the exterior\par
angle BCD of the triangle ACD is equal to the sum of the angles CDA and\par
A. Hence the angle BDA is equal to BCD; but since AB is equal to AD, the\par
angle BDA is equal to ABD; therefore the angle CBD is equal to BCD. Hence\par
[I. vi.] BD is equal to CD; but BD is equal to AC (const.); therefore AC is\par
equal to CD, and therefore [I. v.] the angle CDA is equal to A; but BDA has\par
been proved to be equal to the sum of CDA and A. Hence BDA is double of\par
A. Hence each of the base angles of the triangle ABD is double of the vertical\par
angle.\par
107\par
Exercises.\par
1. Prove that ACD is an isosceles triangle whose vertical angle is equal to three times\par
each of the base angles.\par
2. Prove that BD is the side of a regular decagon inscribed in the circle BDE.\par
3. If DB, DE, EF be consecutive sides of a regular decagon inscribed in a circle, prove\par
BF \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 BD = radius of circle.\par
4. If E be the second point of intersection of the circle ACD with BDE, DE is equal to\par
DB; and if AE, BE, CE, DE be joined, each of the triangles ACE, ADE is congruent with\par
ABD.\par
5. AC is the side of a regular pentagon inscribed in the circle ACD, and EB the side of\par
a regular pentagon inscribed in the circle BDE.\par
6. Since ACE is an isosceles triangle, EB2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 EA2 = AB . BC\f1\emdash that is = BD2\par
; therefore\par
EB2 \f2\u8722?\f0 BD2 = EA2\f1\emdash that is, the square of the side of a pentagon inscribed in a circle exceeds\par
the square of the side of the decagon inscribed in the same circle by the square of the radius.\par
PROP. XI.\emdash Problem.\par
To inscribe a regular pentagon in a given circle (ABCDE).\par
Sol.\emdash Construct an isosceles triangle [x.],\par
having each base angle double the vertical angle, and inscribe in the given circle a triangle\par
ABD equiangular to it. Bisect the angles DAB,\par
ABD by the lines AC, BE. Join EA, ED, DC,\par
CB; then the figure ABCDE is a regular pentagon.\par
Dem.\emdash Because each of the base angles\par
BAD, ABD is double of the angle ADB, and\par
the lines AC, BE bisect them, the five angles\par
BAC, CAD, ADB, DBE, EBA are all equal;\par
therefore the arcs on which they stand are equal; and therefore the five chords,\par
AB, BC, CD, DE, EA are equal. Hence the figure ABCDE is equilateral.\par
Again, because the arcs AB, DE are equal, adding the arc BCD to both,\par
the arc ABCD is equal to the arc BCDE, and therefore [III. xxvii.] the angles\par
AED, BAE, which stand on them, are equal. In the same manner it can be\par
proved that all the angles are equal; therefore the figure ABCDE is equiangular.\par
Hence it is a regular pentagon.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The figure formed by the five diagonals of a regular pentagon is another regular pentagon.\par
2. If the alternate sides of a regular pentagon be produced to meet, the five points of\par
meeting form another regular pentagon.\par
3. Every two consecutive diagonals of a regular pentagon divide each other in extreme\par
and mean ratio.\par
4. Being given a side of a regular pentagon, construct it.\par
5. Divide a right angle into five equal parts.\par
108\par
PROP. XII.\emdash Problem.\par
To describe a regular pentagon about a given circle (ABCDE).\par
Sol.\emdash Let the five points A, B, C, D, E on the circle be the vertices of any\par
inscribed regular pentagon: at these points draw tangents F G, GH, HI, IJ,\par
JF: the figure F GHIJ is a circumscribed regular pentagon.\par
Dem.\emdash Let O be the centre of the circle. Join OE, OA, OB. Now, because the\par
angles A, E of the quadrilateral AOEF are\par
right angles [III. xviii.], the sum of the two\par
remaining angles AOE, AF E is two right angles. In like manner the sum of the angles\par
AOB, AGB is two right angles; therefore the\par
sum of AOE, AF E is equal to the sum of\par
AOB, AGB; but the angles AOE, AOB are\par
equal, because they stand on equal arcs AE,\par
AB [III. xxvii.]. Hence the angle AF E is\par
equal to AGB. In like manner the remaining\par
angles of the figure F GHIJ are equal. Therefore it is equiangular.\par
Again, join OF, OG. Now the triangles EOF, AOF have the sides AF, F E\par
equal [III. xvii., Ex. 1], and F O common, and the base AO equal to the base\par
EO. Hence the angle AF O is equal to EF O [I. viii.]. Therefore the angle AF O\par
is half the angle AF E. In like manner AGO is half the angle AGB; but AF E\par
has been proved equal to AGB; hence AF O is equal to AGO, and F AO is equal\par
to GAO, each being right, and AO common to the two triangles F AO, GAO;\par
hence [I. xxvi.] the side AF is equal to AG; therefore GF is double AF. In like\par
manner JF is double EF; but AF is equal to EF; hence GF is equal to JF.\par
In like manner the remaining sides are equal; therefore the figure F GHIJ is\par
equilateral, and it has been proved equiangular. Hence it is a regular pentagon.\par
This Proposition is a particular case of the following general theorem, of which the proof\par
is the same as the foregoing:\emdash\par
\ldblquote If tangents be drawn to a circle, at the angular points of an inscribed polygon of any\par
number of sides, they will form a regular polygon of the same number of sides circumscribed\par
to the circle.\rdblquote\par
PROP. XIII.\emdash Problem.\par
To inscribe a circle in a regular pentagon (ABCDE).\par
Sol.\emdash Bisect two adjacent angles A, B by the lines AO, BO; then O, the\par
point of intersection of the bisectors, is the centre of the required circle.\par
Dem.\emdash Join CO, and let fall perpendiculars from O on the five sides of the\par
pentagon. Now the triangles ABO, CBO have the side AB equal to BC (hyp.),\par
and BO common, and the angle ABO equal to CBO (const.). Hence the angle\par
BAO is equal to BCO [I. iv.]; but BAO is half BAE (const.). Therefore BCO\par
is half BCD, and therefore CO bisects the angle BCD. In like manner it may\par
be proved that DO bisects the angle D, and EO the angle E.\par
109\par
Again, the triangles BOF, BOG have the\par
angle F equal to G, each being right; and\par
OBF equal to OBG, because OB bisects the\par
angle ABC (const.), and OB common; hence\par
[I. xxvi.] OF is equal to OG. In like manner\par
all the perpendiculars from O on the sides of\par
the pentagon are equal; hence the circle whose\par
centre is O, and radius OF, will touch all the\par
sides of the pentagon, and will therefore be inscribed in it.\par
In the same manner a circle may be inscribed in any regular polygon.\par
PROP. XIV.\emdash Problem.\par
To describe a circle about a regular pentagon (ABCDE).\par
Sol.\emdash Bisect two adjacent angles A, B by the lines AO, BO. Then O, the\par
point of intersection of the bisectors, is the centre of the required circle.\par
Dem.\emdash Join OC, OD, OE. Then the triangles\par
ABO, CBO have the side AB equal to BC (hyp.),\par
BO common, and the angle ABO equal to CBO\par
(const.). Hence the angle BAO is equal to BCO\par
[I. iv.]; but the angle BAE is equal to BCD (hyp.);\par
and since BAO is half BAE (const.), BCO is half\par
BCD. Hence CO bisects the angle BCD. In like\par
manner it may be proved that DO bisects CDE,\par
and EO the angle DEA. Again, because the angle\par
EAB is equal to ABC, their halves are equal. Hence\par
OAB is equal to OBA; therefore [I. vi.] OA is equal to OB. In like manner the\par
lines OC, OD, OE are equal to one another and to OA. Therefore the circle\par
described with O as centre, and OA as radius, will pass through the points B,\par
C, D, E, and be described about the pentagon.\par
In the same manner a circle may be described about any regular polygon.\par
Propositions xiii., xiv. are particular cases of the following theorem:\emdash\par
\ldblquote A regular polygon of any number of sides has one circle inscribed in it, and another\par
described about it, and both circles are concentric.\rdblquote\par
PROP. XV.\emdash Problem.\par
In a given circle (ABCDEF) to inscribe a regular hexagon.\par
Sol.\emdash Take any point A in the circumference, and join it to O, the centre\par
of the given circle; then with A as centre, and AO as radius, describe the circle\par
OBF, intersecting the given circle in the points B, F. Join OB, OF, and\par
produce AO, BO, F O to meet the given circle again in the points D, E, C.\par
Join AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, F A; ABCDEF is the required hexagon.\par
110\par
Dem.\emdash Each of the triangles AOB,\par
AOF is equilateral (see Dem., I. i.).\par
Hence the angles AOB, AOF are each\par
one-third of two right angles; therefore\par
EOF is one-third of two right angles.\par
Again, the angles BOC, COD, DOE are\par
[I. xv.] respectively equal to the angles\par
EOF, F OA, AOB. Therefore the six angles at the centre are equal, because each is one-third of two right angles. Therefore the six chords are equal [III. xxix.]. Hence the hexagon is equilateral.\par
Again, since the arc AF is equal to ED, to each add the arc ABCD; then\par
the whole arc F ABCD is equal to ABCDE; therefore the angles DEF, EF A\par
which stand on these arcs are equal [III. xxvii.]. In the same manner it may be\par
shown that the other angles of the hexagon are equal. Hence it is equiangular,\par
and is therefore a regular hexagon inscribed in the circle.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The side of a regular hexagon inscribed in a circle is equal to the\par
radius.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If three alternate angles of a hexagon be joined, they form an\par
inscribed equilateral triangle.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The area of a regular hexagon inscribed in a circle is equal to twice the area of an\par
equilateral triangle inscribed in the circle; and the square of the side of the triangle is three\par
times the square of the side of the hexagon.\par
2. If the diameter of a circle be produced to C until the produced part is equal to the\par
radius, the two tangents from C and their chord of contact form an equilateral triangle.\par
3. The area of a regular hexagon inscribed in a circle is half the area of an equilateral\par
triangle, and three-fourths of the area of a regular hexagon circumscribed to the circle.\par
PROP. XVI.\emdash Problem.\par
To inscribe a regular polygon of fifteen sides in a given circle.\par
Sol.\emdash Inscribe a regular pentagon ABCDE in the circle [xi.], and also an\par
equilateral triangle AGH [ii.]. Join CG. CG is a side of the required polygon.\par
Dem.\emdash Since ABCDE is a regular pentagon,\par
the arc ABC is 2\par
5\par
ths of the circumference; and since\par
AGH is an equilateral triangle, the arc ABG is 1\par
3\par
rd\par
of the circumference. Hence the arc GC, which is\par
the difference between these two arcs, is equal to\par
2\par
5\par
ths \f2\u8722?\f0\par
1\par
3\par
rd, or 1\par
15 th of the entire circumference; and\par
therefore, if chords equal to GC [i.] be placed round\par
the circle, we shall have a regular polygon of fifteen\par
sides, or quindecagon, inscribed in it.\par
Scholium.\f1\emdash Until the year 1801 no regular polygon could be described by constructions\par
employing the line and circle only, except those discussed in this Book, and those obtained\par
from them by the continued bisection of the arcs of which their sides are the chords; but in\par
111\par
that year the celebrated Gauss proved that if 2n + 1 be a prime number, regular polygons of\par
2\par
n + 1 sides are inscriptable by elementary geometry. For the case n = 4, which is the only\par
figure of this class except the pentagon for which a construction has been given, see Note at\par
the end of this work.\par
Questions for Examination on Book IV.\par
1. What is the subject-matter of Book IV.?\par
2. When is one rectilineal figure said to be inscribed in another?\par
3. When circumscribed?\par
4. When is a circle said to be inscribed in a rectilineal figure?\par
5. When circumscribed about it?\par
6. What is meant by reciprocal propositions? Ans. In reciprocal propositions, to every\par
line in one there corresponds a point in the other; and, conversely, to every point in one there\par
corresponds a line in the other.\par
7. Give instances of reciprocal propositions in Book IV.\par
8. What is a regular polygon?\par
9. What figures can be inscribed in, and circumscribed about, a circle by means of\par
Book IV.?\par
10. What regular polygons has Gauss proved to be inscriptable by the line and circle?\par
11. What is meant by escribed circles?\par
12. How many circles can be described to touch three lines forming a triangle?\par
13. What is the centroid of a triangle?\par
14. What is the orthocentre?\par
15. What is the circumcentre?\par
16. What is the polar circle?\par
17. When is the polar circle imaginary?\par
18. What is the \ldblquote nine-points circle\rdblquote ?\par
19. Why is it so called?\par
20. Name the special nine points through which it passes.\par
21. What three regular figures can be used in filling up the space round a point? Ans.\par
Equilateral triangles, squares, and hexagons.\par
22. If the sides of a triangle be 13, 14, 15, what are the values of the radii of its inscribed\par
and escribed circles?\par
23. What is the radius of the circumscribed circle?\par
24. What is the radius of its nine-points circle?\par
25. What is the distance between the centres of its inscribed and circumscribed circles?\par
26. If r be the radius of a circle, what is the area of its inscribed equilateral triangle?\emdash of its\par
inscribed square?\emdash its inscribed pentagon?\emdash its inscribed hexagon?\emdash its inscribed octagon?\emdash\par
its inscribed decagon?\par
27. With the same hypothesis, find the sides of the same regular figures.\par
Exercises on Book IV.\par
1. If a circumscribed polygon be regular, the corresponding inscribed polygon is also\par
regular, and conversely.\par
2. If a circumscribed triangle be isosceles, the corresponding inscribed triangle is isosceles,\par
and conversely.\par
3. If the two isosceles triangles in Ex. 2 have equal vertical angles, they are both equilateral.\par
4. Divide an angle of an equilateral triangle into five equal parts.\par
5. Inscribe a circle in a sector of a given circle.\par
6. The line DE is parallel to the base BC of the triangle ABC: prove that the circles\par
described about the triangles ABC, ADE touch at A.\par
7. The diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral intersect in E: prove that the tangent at E to\par
the circle about the triangle ABE is parallel to CD.\par
8. Inscribe a regular octagon in a given square.\par
112\par
9. A line of given length slides between two given lines: find the locus of the intersection\par
of perpendiculars from its extremities to the given lines.\par
10. If the perpendicular to any side of a triangle at its middle point meet the internal and\par
external bisectors of the opposite angle in the points D and E; prove that D, E are points on\par
the circumscribed circle.\par
11. Through a given point P draw a chord of a circle so that the intercept EF may subtend\par
a given angle X.\par
12. In a given circle inscribe a triangle having two sides passing through two given points,\par
and the third parallel to a given line.\par
13. Given four points, no three of which are collinear; describe a circle which shall be\par
equidistant from them.\par
14. In a given circle inscribe a triangle whose three sides shall pass through three given\par
points.\par
15. Construct a triangle, being given\emdash\par
1. The radius of the inscribed circle, the vertical angle, and the perpendicular from\par
the vertical angle on the base.\par
2. The base, the sum or difference of the other sides, and the radius of the inscribed\par
circle, or of one of the escribed circles.\par
3. The centres of the escribed circles.\par
16. If F be the middle point of the base of a triangle, DE the diameter of the circumscribed\par
circle which passes through F, and L the point where a parallel to the base through the vertex\par
meets DE: prove DL . F E is equal to the square of half the sum, and DF . LE equal to the\par
square of half the difference of the two remaining sides.\par
17. If from any point within a regular polygon of n sides perpendiculars be let fall on the\par
sides, their sum is equal to n times the radius of the inscribed circle.\par
18. The sum of the perpendiculars let fall from the angular points of a regular polygon of\par
n sides on any line is equal to n times the perpendicular from the centre of the polygon on\par
the same line.\par
19. If R denotes the radius of the circle circumscribed about a triangle ABC, r, r\par
0\par
,\par
r\par
00\par
, r\par
000 the radii of its inscribed and escribed circles, \f3\lang1032\'e4, \'e4\par
0\par
, \'e4\par
00 the perpendiculars from its\par
circumcentre on the sides; \f0\lang1033\'b5, \'b5\par
0\par
, \'b5\par
00 the segments of these perpendiculars between the sides\par
and circumference of the circumscribed circle, we have the relations\f1\emdash\par
r\par
0 + r\par
00 + r\par
000 = 4R + r, (1)\par
\f0\'b5 + \'b5\par
0 + \'b5\par
00 = 2R \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 r, (2)\par
\f3\lang1032\'e4 + \'e4\par
0 + \'e4\par
00 = R + r. (3)\par
The relation (3) supposes that the circumcentre is inside the triangle.\par
20. Through a point D, taken on the side BC of a triangle ABC, is drawn a transversal\par
EDF, and circles described about the triangles DBF, ECD. The locus of their second point\par
of intersection is a circle.\par
21. In every quadrilateral circumscribed about a circle, the middle points of its diagonals\par
and the centre of the circle are collinear.\par
22. Find on a given line a point P, the sum or difference of whose distances from two\par
given points may be given.\par
23. Find a point such that, if perpendiculars be let fall from it on four given lines, their\par
feet may be collinear.\par
24. The line joining the orthocentre of a triangle to any point P, in the circumference of\par
its circumscribed circle, is bisected by the line of collinearity of perpendiculars from P on the\par
sides of the triangle.\par
25. The orthocentres of the four triangles formed by any four lines are collinear.\par
26. If a semicircle and its diameter be touched by any circle, either internally or externally,\par
twice the rectangle contained by the radius of the semicircle, and the radius of the tangential\par
circle, is equal to the rectangle contained by the segments of any secant to the semicircle,\par
through the point of contact of the diameter and touching circle.\par
113\par
27. If \'f1, \'f1\par
0 be the radii of two circles, touching each other at the centre of the inscribed\par
circle of a triangle, and each touching the circumscribed circle, prove\par
1\par
\'f1\par
+\par
1\par
\'f1\par
0\par
=\par
2\par
r\par
,\par
and state and prove corresponding theorems for the escribed circles.\par
28. If from any point in the circumference of the circle, circumscribed about a regular\par
polygon of n sides, lines be drawn to its angular points, the sum of their squares is equal to\par
2n times the square of the radius.\par
29. In the same case, if the lines be drawn from any point in the circumference of the\par
inscribed circle, prove that the sum of their squares is equal to n times the sum of the squares\par
of the radii of the inscribed and the circumscribed circles.\par
30. State the corresponding theorem for the sum of the squares of the lines drawn from\par
any point in the circumference of any concentric circle.\par
31. If from any point in the circumference of any concentric circle perpendiculars be let\par
fall on all the sides of any regular polygon, the sum of their squares is constant.\par
32. For the inscribed circle, the constant is equal to\par
3n\par
2\par
times the square of the radius.\par
33. For the circumscribed circle, the constant is equal to n times the square of the radius\par
of the inscribed circle, together with 1\par
2\par
n times the square of the radius of the circumscribed\par
circle.\par
34. If the circumference of a circle whose radius is R be divided into seventeen equal parts,\par
and AO be the diameter drawn from one of the points of division (A), and if \'f11, \'f12 . . . . . . \'f18\par
denote the chords from O to the points of division, A1, A2 . . . . . . A8 on one side of AO, then\par
\'f11\'f12\'f14\'f18 = R\par
4\par
; and \'f13\'f15\'f16\'f17 = R\par
4\par
.\f1\emdash Catalan.\par
Dem.\emdash Let the supplemental chords corresponding to \f3\'f11, \'f12, &c., be denoted by r1, r2,\par
&c.; then [III. xxxv. Ex. 2], we have\par
\'f11r1 = Rr2,\par
\'f12r2 = Rr4,\par
\'f14r4 = Rr8,\par
\'f18r8 = Rr1,\par
Hence \'f11\'f12\'f14\'f18 = R\par
4\par
.\par
And it may be proved in the same manner that\par
\'f11\'f12\'f13\'f14\'f15\'f16\'f17\'f18 = R\par
8\par
.\par
Therefore \'f13\'f15\'f16\'f17 = R\par
4\par
.\par
35. If from the middle point of the line joining any two of four concyclic points a perpendicular be let fall on the line joining the remaining two, the six perpendiculars thus obtained\par
are concurrent.\par
36. The greater the number of sides of a regular polygon circumscribed about a given\par
circle, the less will be its perimeter.\par
37. The area of any regular polygon of more than four sides circumscribed about a circle\par
is less than the square of the diameter.\par
38. Four concyclic points taken three by three determine four triangles, the centres of\par
whose nine-points circles are concyclic.\par
39. If two sides of a triangle be given in position, and if their included angle be equal to\par
an angle of an equilateral triangle, the locus of the centre of its nine-points circle is a right\par
line.\par
40. If, in the hypothesis and notation of Ex. 34, \'e1, \'e2 denote any two suffixes whose sum\par
is less than 8, and of which \'e1 is the greater,\par
\'f1\'e1\'f1\'e2 = R(\'f1\'e1\f2\u8722?\f3\lang1032\'e2 + \'f1\'e1+\'e2).\par
For instance, \'f11\'f14 = R(\'f13 + \'f15) [III. xxxv., Ex. 7].\par
114\par
In the same case, if the suffixes be greater than 8,\par
\'f1\'e1 . \'f1\'e2 = R(\'f1\'e1\f2\u8722?\f3\lang1032\'e2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f117\f2\u8722?\f3\lang1032\'e1\f2\u8722?\f3\lang1032\'e2).\par
For instance, \'f18\'f12 = R(\'f16 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f17) [III. xxxv., Ex. 6].\par
41. Two lines are given in position: draw a transversal through a given point, forming\par
with the given lines a triangle of given perimeter.\par
42. Given the vertical angle and perimeter of a triangle, construct it with either of the\par
following data: 1. The bisector of the vertical angle; 2. the perpendicular from the vertical\par
angle on the base; 3. the radius of the inscribed circle.\par
43. In a given circle inscribe a triangle so that two sides may pass through two given\par
points, and that the third side may be a maximum or a minimum.\par
44. If s be the semiperimeter of a triangle, r\par
0\par
, r\par
00\par
, r\par
000, the radii of its escribed circles,\par
r\par
0\par
r\par
00 + r\par
00r\par
000 + r\par
000r\par
0 = s\par
2\par
.\par
45. The feet of the perpendiculars from the extremities of the base on either bisector of\par
the vertical angle, the middle point of the base, and the foot of the perpendicular from the\par
vertical angle on the base, are concyclic.\par
46. Given the base of a triangle and the vertical angle; find the locus of the centre of the\par
circle passing through the centres of the escribed circles.\par
47. The perpendiculars from the centres of the escribed circles of a triangle on the corresponding sides are concurrent.\par
48. If AB be the diameter of a circle, and P Q any chord cutting AB in O, and if the lines\par
AP, AQ intersect the perpendicular to AB at O, in D and E respectively, the points A, B,\par
D, E are concyclic.\par
49. If the sides of a triangle be in arithmetical progression, and if R, r be the radii of\par
the circumscribed and inscribed circles; then 6Rr is equal to the rectangle contained by the\par
greatest and least sides.\par
50. Inscribe in a given circle a triangle having its three sides parallel to three given lines.\par
51. If the sides AB, BC, &c., of a regular pentagon be bisected in the points A0\par
, B0\par
, C0\par
,\par
D0\par
, E0\par
, and if the two pairs of alternate sides, BC, AE; AB, DE, meet in the points A00\par
, E00\par
,\par
respectively, prove\par
4 A\par
00AE00 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 4 A\par
0AE0 = pentagon A\par
0B\par
0C\par
0D0E\par
0\par
.\par
52. In a circle, prove that an equilateral inscribed polygon is regular, and also an equilateral\par
circumscribed polygon, if the number of sides be odd.\par
53. Prove also that an equiangular circumscribed polygon is regular, and an equiangular\par
inscribed polygon, if the number of sides be odd.\par
54. The sum of the perpendiculars drawn to the sides of an equiangular polygon from any\par
point inside the figure is constant.\par
55. Express the sides of a triangle in terms of the radii of its escribed circles.\par
115\par
BOOK V.\par
THEORY OF PROPORTION\par
DEFINITIONS.\par
Introduction.\f1\emdash Every proposition in the theories of ratio and proportion is\par
true for all descriptions of magnitude. Hence it follows that the proper treatment\par
is the Algebraic. It is, at all events, the easiest and the most satisfactory.\par
Euclid\rquote s proofs of the propositions, in the Theory of Proportion, possess at\par
present none but a historical interest, as no student reads them now. But\par
although his demonstrations are abandoned, his propositions are quoted by\par
every writer, and his nomenclature is universally adopted. For these reasons\par
it appears to us that the best method is to state Euclid\rquote s definitions, explain\par
them, or prove them when necessary, for some are theorems under the guise of\par
definitions, and then supply simple algebraic proofs of his propositions.\par
i. A less magnitude is said to be a part or submultiple of a greater magnitude,\par
when the less measures the greater\emdash that is, when the less is contained a certain\par
number of times exactly in the greater.\par
ii. A greater magnitude is said to be a multiple of a less when the greater\par
is measured by the less\emdash that is, when the greater contains the less a certain\par
number of times exactly.\par
iii. Ratio is the mutual relation of two magnitudes of the same kind with\par
respect to quantity.\par
iv. Magnitudes are said to have a ratio to one another when the less can be\par
multiplied so as to exceed the greater.\par
These definitions require explanation, especially Def. iii., which has the fault\par
of conveying no precise meaning\emdash being, in fact, unintelligible.\par
The following annotations will make them explicit:\emdash\par
1. If an integer be divided into any number\par
of equal parts, one, or the sum of any number of\par
these parts, is called a fraction. Thus, if the line AB represent the integer, and if it be divided\par
into four equal parts in the points C, D, E, then AC is 1\par
4\par
; AD,\par
2\par
4\par
; AE,\par
3\par
4\par
. Thus, a fraction\par
is denoted by two numbers parted by a horizontal line; the lower, called the denominator,\par
denotes the number of equal parts into which the integer is divided; and the upper, called\par
the numerator, denotes the number of these equal parts which are taken. Hence it follows,\par
that if the numerator be less than the denominator, the fraction is less than unity. If the\par
numerator be equal to the denominator, the fraction is equal to unity; and if greater than the\par
denominator, it is greater than unity. It is evident that a fraction is an abstract quantity\emdash that\par
is, that its value is independent of the nature of the integer which is divided.\par
2. If we divide each of the equal parts AC, CD, DE, EB into two equal parts, the whole,\par
AB, will be divided into eight equal parts; and we see that AC = 2\par
8\par
; AD = 4\par
8\par
; AE = 6\par
8\par
;\par
AB = 8\par
8\par
; Now, we saw in 1, that AE = 3\par
4\par
of the integer, and we have just shown that it is\par
equal to 6\par
8\par
. Hence 3\par
4 = 6\par
8\par
; but 6\par
8\par
would be got from 3\par
4\par
by multiplying its terms (numerator\par
and denominator) by 2. Hence we infer generally that multiplying the terms of any fraction\par
by 2 does not alter its value. In like manner it may be shown that multiplying the terms of\par
116\par
a fraction by any whole number does not alter its value. Hence it follows conversely, that\par
dividing the terms of a fraction by a whole number does not alter the value. Hence we have\par
the following important and fundamental theorem:\emdash Two transformations can be made on\par
any fraction without changing its value; namely, its terms can be either multiplied or divided\par
by any whole number, and in either case the value of the new fraction is equal to the value\par
of the original one.\par
3. If we take any number, such as 3, and multiply it by any whole number, the product is\par
called a multiple of 3. Thus 6, 9, 12, 15, &c., are multiples of 3; but 10, 13, 17, &c., are not,\par
because the multiplication of 3 by any whole number will not produce them. Conversely, 3 is\par
a submultiple, or measure, or part of 6, 9, 12, 15, &c., because it is contained in each of these\par
without a remainder; but not of 10, 13, 17, &c., because in each case it leaves a remainder.\par
4. If we consider two magnitudes of the same\par
kind, such as two lines AB, CD, and if we suppose that AB is equal to 3\par
4\par
of CD, it is evident, if\par
AB be divided into 3 equal parts, and CD into 4\par
equal parts, that one of the parts into which AB\par
is divided is equal to one of the parts into which\par
CD is divided. And as there are 3 parts in AB, and 4 in CD, we express this relation by\par
saying that AB has to CD the ratio of 3 to 4; and we denote it thus, 3 : 4. Hence the ratio\par
3 : 4 expresses the same idea as the fraction 3\par
4\par
. In fact, both are different ways of expressing\par
and writing the same thing. When written 3 : 4 it is called a ratio, and when 3\par
4\par
a fraction.\par
In the same manner it can be shown that every ratio whose terms are commensurable can be\par
converted into a fraction; and, conversely, every fraction can be turned into a ratio.\par
From this explanation we see that the ratio of any two commensurable magnitudes is\par
the same as the ratio of the numerical quantities which denote these magnitudes. Thus, the\par
ratio of two commensurable lines is the ratio of the numbers which express their lengths,\par
measured with the same unit. And this may be extended to the case where the lines are\par
incommensurable. Thus, if a be the side and b the diagonal of a square, the ratio of a : b is\par
a\par
b\par
, or\par
1\par
\f2\u8730?\f0\par
2\par
.\par
When two quantities are incommensurable, such as the diagonal and the side of a square,\par
although their ratio is not equal to that of any two commensurable numbers, yet a series\par
of pairs of fractions can be found whose difference is continually diminishing, and which\par
ultimately becomes indefinitely small; such that the ratio of the incommensurable quantities\par
is greater than one, and less than the other fraction of each pair. These fractions are called\par
convergents. By their means we can approximate as nearly as we please to the exact value of\par
the ratio. In the case of the diagonal and the side of a square, the following are the pairs of\par
convergents:\f1\emdash\par
14\par
10\par
,\par
15\par
10\par
;\par
141\par
100\par
,\par
142\par
100\par
;\par
1414\par
1000\par
,\par
1415\par
1000\par
; &c.,\par
and the ratio is intermediate to each pair. It is evident we may continue the series as far as we\par
please. Now if we denote the first of any of the foregoing pairs of fractions by m\par
n\par
, the second\par
will be\par
m + 1\par
n\par
; and in general, in the case of two incommensurable quantities, two fractions m\par
n\par
and\par
m + 1\par
n\par
can always be found, where n can be made as large as we please, one of which is less\par
and the other greater than the true value of the ratio. For let a and b be the incommensurable\par
quantities; then, evidently, we cannot find two multiples na, mb, such that na = mb. In\par
this case, take any multiple of a, such as na, then this quantity must lie between some two\par
consecutive multiples of b, such as mb, and (m + 1)b; therefore na\par
mb\par
is greater than unity, and\par
na\par
(m + 1)b\par
less than unity. Hence\par
a\par
b\par
lies between\par
m\par
n\par
and\par
m + 1\par
n\par
. Now, since the difference\par
between\par
m\par
n\par
and\par
m + 1\par
n\par
namely,\par
1\par
n\par
becomes small as n increases, we see that the difference\par
between the ratio of two incommensurable quantities and that of two commensurable numbers\par
117\par
m and n can be made as small as we please. Hence, ultimately, the ratio of incommensurable\par
quantities may be regarded as the limit of the ratio of commensurable quantities.\par
5. The two terms of a ratio are called the antecedent and the consequent. These correspond\par
to the numerator and the denominator of a fraction. Hence we have the following definition:\emdash\par
\ldblquote A ratio is the fraction got by making the antecedent the numerator and the consequent the\par
denominator.\rdblquote\par
6. The reciprocal of a ratio is the ratio obtained by interchanging the antecedent and the\par
consequent. Thus, 4 : 3 is the reciprocal of the ratio 3 : 4. Hence we have the following\par
theorem:\emdash\ldblquote The product of a ratio and its reciprocal is unity.\rdblquote\par
7. If we multiply any two numbers, as 5 and 7, by any number such as 4, the products 20,\par
28 are called equimultiples of 5 and 7. In like manner, 10 and 15 are equimultiples of 2 and\par
3, and 18 and 30 of 3 and 5, &c.\par
v. The first of four magnitudes has to the second the same ratio which\par
the third has to the fourth, when any equimultiples whatsoever of the first and\par
third being taken, and any equimultiples whatsoever of the second and fourth,\par
if, according as the multiple of the first is greater than, equal to, or less than\par
the multiple of the second, the multiple of the third is greater than, equal to,\par
or less than the multiple of the fourth.\par
vi. Magnitudes which have the same ratio are called proportionals. When\par
four magnitudes are proportionals, it is usually expressed by saying, \ldblquote The first\par
is to the second as the third is to the fourth.\rdblquote\par
viii. Analogy or proportion is the similitude of ratios.\par
We have given the foregoing definitions in the order of Euclid, as given by Simson, Lardner,\par
and others;2 but it is evidently an inverted order; for vi. viii. are definitions of proportion,\par
and v. is only a test of proportion, and is not a definition but a theorem, and one which,\par
instead of being taken for granted, requires proof. The following explanations will give the\par
student clear conceptions of their meaning:\emdash\par
1. If we take two ratios, such as 6 : 9 and 10 : 15, which are each equal to the same thing\par
(in this example each is equal to 2\par
3\par
), they are equal to one another (I. Axiom i.). Then we\par
may write it thus\emdash\par
6 : 9 = 10 : 15.\par
This would be the most intelligible way, but it is not the usual one, which is as follows:\emdash\par
6 : 9 :: 10 : 15. In this form it is called a proportion. Hence a proportion consists of two\par
ratios which are asserted by it to be equal. Its four terms consist of two antecedents and two\par
consequents. The 1st and 3rd terms are the antecedents, and the 2nd and 4th the consequents.\par
Also the first and last terms are called the extremes, and the two middle terms the means.\par
2. Since a proportion consists of two equal ratios, and each ratio can be written as a\par
fraction, whenever we have a proportion such as\par
a : b :: c : d,\par
we can write it in the form of two equal fractions. Thus:\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
.\par
Conversely, an equation between two fractions can be put into a proportion. By means of\par
these simple principles all the various properties of proportion can be proved in the most\par
direct and easy manner.\par
3. If we take the proportion a : b :: c : d, and multiply the first and third terms, each by\par
m, and second and fourth, each by n, we get the four multiples, ma, nb, mc, nd; and we want\par
to prove that if ma is greater than nb, mc is greater than nd; if equal, equal; and if less, less.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: c : d,\par
we have\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
.\par
2Except that viii. is put before vii., because it relates, as v. and vi., to the equality of\par
ratios, whereas vii. is a test of their inequality.\par
118\par
Hence, multiplying each by\par
m\par
n\par
we get\par
ma\par
nb\par
=\par
mc\par
nd\par
.\par
Now, it is evident that if ma\par
nb\par
is greater than unity,\par
mc\par
nd\par
is greater than unity; but if ma\par
nb\par
is\par
greater than unity, ma is greater than nb; and if mc\par
nd\par
is greater than unity, mc is greater than\par
nd. In like manner, if ma be equal to nb, mc is equal to nd; and if less, less.\par
The foregoing is an easy proof of the converse of the theorem which is contained in Euclid\rquote s\par
celebrated Fifth Definition.\par
Next, to prove Euclid\rquote s theorem\emdash that if, according as the multiple of the first of four\par
magnitudes is greater than, equal to, or less than the multiple of the second, the multiple of\par
the third is greater than, equal to, or less than the multiple of the fourth; the ratio of the first\par
to the second is equal to the ratio of the third to the fourth.\par
Dem.\emdash Let, a, b, c, d be the four magnitudes. First suppose that a and b are commensurable, then it is evident that we can take multiples na, mb, such that na = mb. Hence, by\par
hypothesis, nc = md. Thus,\par
na\par
mb\par
= 1,\par
nc\par
md\par
= 1;\par
therefore a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
.\par
Next, suppose a and b are incommensurable. Then, as in a recent note, we can find two\par
numbers m and n, such that\par
na\par
mb\par
is greater than unity, but\par
na\par
(m + 1)b\par
less than unity. Hence\par
a\par
b\par
lies between\par
m\par
n\par
and\par
m + 1\par
n\par
. Now, since by hypothesis, when\par
na\par
mb\par
is greater than unity,\par
nc\par
md\par
is greater than unity; and when\par
na\par
(m + 1)b\par
is less than unity,\par
nc\par
(m + 1)d\par
is less than unity.\par
Hence, since\par
a\par
b\par
lies between\par
m\par
n\par
and\par
m + 1\par
n\par
,\par
c\par
d\par
lies between the same quantities. Therefore\par
the difference between a\par
b\par
and\par
c\par
d\par
is less than\par
1\par
n\par
; and since n may be as large as we please, the\par
difference is nothing; therefore\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
.\par
vii. When of the multiples of four magnitudes (taken as in Def. v.) the\par
multiple of the first is greater than that of the second, but the multiple of the\par
third not greater than that of the fourth, the first has to the second a greater\par
ratio than the third has to the fourth.\par
This, instead of being a definition, is a theorem. We have altered the last clause from\par
that given in Simson\rquote s Euclid, which runs thus:\emdash\ldblquote The first is said to have to the second a\par
greater ratio than the third has to the fourth.\rdblquote  This is misleading, as it implies that it is,\par
by convention, that the first ratio is greater than the second, whereas, in fact, such is not\par
the case; for it follows from the hypothesis that the first ratio is greater than the second; and\par
if it did not, it could not be made so by definition. We have made a similar change in the\par
enunciation of the Fifth Definition.\par
Let a, b, c, d be the four magnitudes, and m and n the multiples taken, it is required\par
to prove, that if ma be greater than nb, but mc not greater than nd, that the ratio a : b is\par
greater than the ratio c : d.\par
Dem.\emdash Since ma is greater than nb, but mc not greater than nd, it is evident that\par
ma\par
nb\par
is greater than\par
mc\par
nd\par
;\par
therefore a\par
b\par
is greater than\par
c\par
d\par
;\par
that is, the ratio a : b is greater than the ratio c : d.\par
119\par
ix. Proportion consists of three terms at least.\par
This has the same fault as some of the others\emdash it is not a definition, but an inference. It\par
occurs when the means in a proportion are equal, so that, in fact, there are four terms. As\par
an illustration, let us take the numbers 4, 6, 9. Here the ratio of 4 : 6 is 2\par
3\par
, and the ratio of\par
6 : 9 is 2\par
3\par
, so that 4, 6, 9 are continued proportionals; but, in reality, there are four terms, for\par
the full proportion is 4 : 6 :: 6 : 9.\par
x. When three magnitudes are continual proportionals, the first is said to\par
have to the third the duplicate ratio of that which it has to the second.\par
xi. When four magnitudes are continual proportionals, the first is said to\par
have to the fourth the triplicate ratio of that which it has to the second.\par
xii. When there is any number of magnitudes of the same kind greater than\par
two, the first is said to have to the last the ratio compounded of the ratios of\par
the first to the second, of the second to the third, of the third to the fourth, &c.\par
We have placed these definitions in a group; but their order is inverted, and, as we shall\par
see, Def. xii. is a theorem, and x. and xi. are only inferences from it.\par
1. If we have two ratios, such as 5 : 7 and 3 : 4, and if we convert each ratio into a fraction,\par
and multiply these fractions together, we get a result which is called the ratio compounded of\par
the two ratios; viz. in this example it is 15\par
28 , or 15 : 28. It is evident we get the same result if\par
we multiply the two antecedents together for a new antecedent, and the two consequents for\par
a new consequent. Hence we have the following definition:\emdash\ldblquote The ratio compounded of any\par
number of ratios it the ratio of the product of all the antecedents to the product of all the\par
consequents.\rdblquote\par
2. To prove the theorem contained in Def. xii.\par
Let the magnitudes be a, b, c, d. Then the ratio of\par
1st : 2nd =\par
a\par
b\par
,\par
2nd : 3rd =\par
b\par
c\par
,\par
3rd : 4th =\par
c\par
d\par
.\par
Hence the ratio compounded of the ratio of 1st : 2nd, of 2nd : 3rd, of 3rd : 4th\par
=\par
abc\par
bcd\par
=\par
a\par
d\par
= ratio of 1st : 4th.\par
3. If three magnitudes be proportional, the ratio of the 1st : 3rd is equal to the square of\par
the ratio of the 1st : 2nd. For the ratio of the 1st : 3rd is compounded of the ratio of the 1st :\par
2nd, and of the ratio of the 2nd : 3rd; and since these ratios are equal, the ratio compounded\par
of them will be equal to the square of one of them.\par
Or thus: Let the proportionals be a, b, c, that is, let a : b :: b : c; hence we have\par
b\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
b\par
.\par
And multiplying each by a\par
b\par
, we get\par
a\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
2\par
b\par
2\par
;\par
or a : c :: a\par
2\par
: b\par
2\emdash that is, 1st : 3rd :: square of 1st : square of 2nd. Now, the ratio of 1st : 3rd\par
is, by Def. x., the duplicate ratio of 1st : 2nd. Hence the duplicate ratio of two magnitudes\par
means the square of their ratio, or, what is the same thing, the ratio of their squares (see\par
Book VI. xx.).\par
4. If four magnitudes be continual proportionals, the ratio of 1st : 4th is equal to the cube\par
of the ratio of 1st : 2nd. This may be proved exactly like 3. Hence we see that what Euclid\par
calls triplicate ratio of two magnitudes is the ratio of their cubes, or the cube of their ratio.\par
120\par
We also see that there is no necessity to introduce extraneous magnitudes for the purpose\par
of defining duplicate and triplicate ratios, as Euclid does. In fact, the definitions by squares\par
and cubes are more explicit.\par
xiii. In proportionals, the antecedent terms are called homologous to one\par
another; as also the consequents to one another.\par
If one proportion be given, from it an indefinite number of other proportions can be\par
inferred, and a great part of the theory of proportion consists in proving the truth of these\par
derived proportions. Geometers make use of certain technical terms to denote the most\par
important of these processes. We shall indicate these terms by including them in parentheses\par
in connexion with the Propositions to which they refer. They are useful as indicating, by one\par
word, the whole enunciation of a theorem.\par
Every Proposition in the Fifth Book is a Theorem.\par
PROP. I.\emdash Theorem.\par
If any number of magnitudes of the same kind (a, b, c, &c.), be equimultiples\par
of as many others (a\par
0\par
, b0\par
, c0\par
, &c.), then the sum of the first magnitudes (a+b+\par
c, &c.) shall be the same multiple of the sum of the second which any magnitude\par
of the first system is of the corresponding magnitude of the second system.\par
Dem.\emdash Let m denote the multiple which the magnitudes of the first system\par
are of those of the second system.\par
Then we have a = ma0\par
(hyp.),\par
b = mb0\par
,\par
c = mc0\par
.\par
&c., &c.\par
Hence, by addition,\par
(a + b + c + &c.) = m(a\par
0 + b\par
0 + c\par
0\par
, &c.).\par
PROP. II.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two magnitudes of the same kind (a, b) be the same multiples of another\par
(c) which two corresponding magnitudes (a\par
0\par
, b0\par
) are of another (c\par
0\par
), then the\par
sum of the two first is the same multiple of their submultiple which the sum of\par
their corresponding magnitudes is of their submultiple.\par
Dem.\emdash Let m and n be the multiples which a and b are of c.\par
Then we have\par
a = mc and a\par
0 = mc0\par
,\par
b = nc and b\par
0 = nc0\par
.\par
Therefore\par
(a + b) = (m + n)c, and (a\par
0 + b\par
0\par
) = (m + n)c\par
0\par
.\par
Hence a + b is the same multiple of c that a\par
0 + b\par
0\par
is of c\par
0\par
.\par
This Proposition is evidently true for any number of multiples.\par
121\par
PROP. III.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two magnitudes (a, b) be equimultiples of two others (a\par
0\par
, b0\par
); then any\par
equimultiples of the first magnitudes (a, b) will be also equimultiples of the second\par
magnitudes (a\par
0\par
, b0\par
).\par
Dem.\emdash Let m denote the multiples which a, b are of a\par
0\par
, b\par
0\par
; then we have\par
a = ma0\par
, b = mb0\par
.\par
Hence, multiplying each equation by n, we get\par
na = mna0\par
, nb = mnb0\par
.\par
Hence, na, nb are equimultiples of a\par
0\par
, b\par
0\par
.\par
PROP. IV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If four magnitudes be proportional, and if any equimultiples of the first and\par
third be taken, and any other equimultiples of the second and fourth; then the\par
multiple of the first : the multiple of the second :: the multiple of the third : the\par
multiple of the fourth.\par
Let a : b :: c : d; then ma : nb :: mc : nd.\par
Dem.\emdash We have a : b :: c : d (hyp.);\par
therefore a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
.\par
Hence, multiplying each fraction by m\par
n\par
, we get\par
ma\par
nb =\par
mc\par
nd ;\par
therefore ma : nb :: mc : nd.\par
PROP. V.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two magnitudes of the same kind (a, b) be the same multiples of another\par
(c) which two corresponding magnitudes (a\par
0\par
, b0\par
) are of another (c\par
0\par
), then the\par
difference of the two first is the same multiple of their submultiple (c), which the\par
difference of their corresponding magnitudes is of their submultiple (c\par
0\par
) (compare\par
Proposition ii.).\par
Dem.\emdash Let m and n be the multiples which a and b are of c.\par
Then we have a = mc, and a\par
0 = mc0\par
,\par
b = nc, and b\par
0 = nc0\par
.\par
Therefore (a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b) = (m \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 n)c, and (a\par
0 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b\par
0\par
) = (m \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 n)c\par
0\par
. Hence a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b is the\par
same multiple of c that a\par
0 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b\par
0\par
is of c\par
0\par
.\par
Cor.\f1\emdash If a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b = c, a\par
0 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b\par
0 = c\par
0\par
; for if a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b = c, m \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 n = 1.\par
122\par
PROP. VI.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If a magnitude (a) be the same multiple of another (b), which a magnitude\par
(a\par
0\par
) taken from the first is of a magnitude (b\par
0\par
) taken from the second, the remainder is the same multiple of the remainder that the whole is of the whole\par
(compare Proposition i.).\par
Dem.\emdash Let m denote the multiples which the magnitudes a, a\par
0 are of b, b\par
0\par
;\par
then we have\par
a = mb,\par
a\par
0 = mb0\par
.\par
Hence (a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 a\par
0\par
) = m(b \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b\par
0\par
).\par
Prop. A.\f1\emdash Theorem (Simson).\par
If two ratios be equal, then according as the antecedent of the first ratio is\par
greater than, equal to, or less than its consequent, the antecedent of the second\par
ratio is greater than, equal to, or less than its consequent.\par
Dem.\emdash Let a : b :: c : d;\par
then a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
;\par
and if a be greater than b,\par
a\par
b\par
is greater than unity; therefore c\par
d\par
is greater than\par
unity, and c is greater than d.\par
In like manner, if a be equal to b, c is equal to d, and if less, less.\par
Prop. B.\emdash Theorem (Simson).\par
If two ratios are equal their reciprocals are equal (invertendo).\par
Let a : b :: c : d, then b : a :: d : c.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: c : d;\par
then a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
;\par
therefore 1 \f0\'f7\par
a\par
b\par
= 1 \'f7\par
c\par
d\par
,\par
or\par
b\par
a\par
=\par
d\par
c\par
Hence b : a :: d : c.\par
123\par
Prop. C.\f1\emdash Theorem (Simson).\par
If the first of four magnitudes be the same multiple of the second which the\par
third is of the fourth, the first is to the second as the third is to the fourth.\par
Let a = mb, c = md; then a : b :: c : d.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a = mb, we have a\par
b\par
= m.\par
In like manner, c\par
d\par
= m; therefore a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
.\par
Hence a : b :: c : d.\par
Prop. D.\emdash Theorem (Simson).\par
If the first be to the second as to the third is to the fourth, and if the first\par
be a multiple or submultiple of the second, the third is the same multiple or\par
submultiple of the fourth.\par
1. Let a : b :: c : d, and let a be a multiple of b, then c is the same multiple\par
of d.\par
Dem.\emdash Let a = mb, then a\par
b\par
= m;\par
but a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
; therefore c\par
d\par
= m, and c = md.\par
2. Let a =\par
b\par
n\par
, then a\par
b\par
=\par
1\par
n\par
;\par
therefore c\par
d\par
=\par
1\par
n\par
,\par
Hence c =\par
d\par
n\par
.\par
PROP. VII.\emdash Theorem.\par
1. Equal magnitudes have equal ratios to the same magnitude.\par
2. The same magnitude has equal ratios to equal magnitudes.\par
Let a and b be equal magnitudes, and c any other magnitude.\par
Then 1. a : c :: b : c,\par
2. c : a :: c : b.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a = b, dividing each by c, we have\par
a\par
c\par
=\par
b\par
c\par
;\par
therefore a : c :: b : c.\par
124\par
Again, since a = b, dividing c by each, we have\par
c\par
a\par
=\par
c\par
b\par
;\par
therefore c : a :: c : b.\par
Observation.\emdash 2 follows at once from 1 by Proposition B.\par
PROP. VIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
1. Of two unequal magnitudes, the greater has a greater ratio to any third\par
magnitude than the less has; 2. any third magnitude has a greater ratio to the\par
less of two unequal magnitudes than it has to the greater.\par
1. Let a be greater than b, and let c be any other magnitude of the same\par
kind, then the ratio a : c is greater than the ratio b : c.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a is greater than b, dividing each by c,\par
a\par
c\par
is greater than b\par
c\par
;\par
therefore the ratio a : c is greater than the ratio b : c.\par
2. To prove that the ratio c : b is greater than the ratio c : a.\par
Dem.\emdash Since b is less than a, the quotient which is the result of dividing\par
any magnitude by b is greater than the quotient which is got by dividing the\par
same magnitude by a;\par
therefore c\par
b\par
is greater than c\par
a\par
.\par
Hence the ratio c : b is greater than the ratio c : a.\par
PROP. IX.\emdash Theorem.\par
Magnitudes which have equal ratios to the same magnitude are equal to one\par
another; 2. magnitudes to which the same magnitude has equal ratios are equal\par
to one another.\par
1. If a : c :: b : c, to prove a = b.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : c :: b : c,\par
a\par
c\par
=\par
b\par
c\par
.\par
Hence, multiplying each by c, we get a = b.\par
2. If c : a :: c : b, to prove a = b.\par
Dem.\emdash Since c : a :: c : b,\par
by inversion, a : c :: b : c;\par
therefore a = b. [1].\par
125\par
PROP. X.\emdash Theorem.\par
Of two unequal magnitudes, that which has the greater ratio to any third is\par
the greater of the two; and that to which any third has the greater ratio is the\par
less of the two.\par
1. If the ratio a : c be greater than the ratio b : c, to prove a greater than b.\par
Dem.\emdash Since the ratio a : c is greater than the ratio b : c,\par
a\par
c\par
is greater than b\par
c\par
.\par
Hence, multiplying each by c, we get a greater than b.\par
2. If the ratio c : b is greater than the ratio c : a, to prove b is less than a.\par
Dem.\emdash Since the ratio c : b is greater than the ratio c : a,\par
c\par
b\par
is greater than c\par
a\par
.\par
Hence 1 \f0\'f7\par
c\par
b\par
is less than 1 \'f7\par
c\par
a\par
,\par
that is, b\par
c\par
is less than a\par
c\par
.\par
Hence, multiplying each by c, we get\par
b less than a.\par
PROP. XI.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
Ratios that are equal to the same ratio are equal to one another.\par
Let a : b :: e : f, and c : d :: e : f, to prove a : b :: c : d.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: e : f,\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
e\par
f\par
.\par
In like manner, c\par
d\par
=\par
e\par
f\par
.\par
Hence a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
[I., Axiom i.],\par
and a : b :: c : d.\par
126\par
PROP. XII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If any number of ratios be equal to one another, any one of these equal\par
ratios is equal to the ratio of the sum of all the antecedents to the sum of all the\par
consequents.\par
Let the ratios a : b, c : d, e : f, be all equal to one another; it is required to\par
prove that any of these ratios is equal to the ratio a + c + e : b + d + f.\par
Dem.\emdash By hypotheses,\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
=\par
e\par
f\par
.\par
Since these fractions are all equal, let their common value be r; then we have\par
a\par
b\par
= r,\par
c\par
d\par
= r,\par
e\par
f\par
= r;\par
therefore a = br,\par
c = dr,\par
e = fr ;\par
therefore a + c + e = (b + d + f)r.\par
Hence a + c + e\par
b + d + f\par
= r ;\par
therefore a\par
b\par
=\par
a + c + e\par
b + d + f\par
,\par
and a : b :: a + c + e : b + d + f.\par
Cor.\emdash With the same hypotheses, if l, m, n be any three multipliers, a : b ::\par
la + mc + ne : lb + md + nf.\par
PROP. XIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two ratios are equal, and if one of them be greater than any third ratio, then\par
the other is also greater than that third ratio.\par
If a : b :: c : d, but the ratio of c : d greater than the ratio of e : f; then the\par
ratio of a : b is greater than the ratio of e : f.\par
Dem.\emdash Since the ratio of c : d is greater than the ratio of e : f,\par
c\par
d\par
is greater than e\par
f\par
.\par
Again, since a : b :: c : d,\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
;\par
therefore a\par
b\par
is greater than e\par
f\par
.\par
or the ratio of a : b is greater than the ratio of e : f.\par
127\par
PROP. XIV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two ratios be equal, then, according as the antecedent of the first ratio is\par
greater than, equal to, or less than the antecedent of the second, the consequent\par
of the first is greater than, equal to, or less than the consequent of the second.\par
Let a : b :: c : d; then if a be greater than c, b is greater than d; if equal,\par
equal; if less, less.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: c : d.\par
we have a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
,\par
and multiplying each by b\par
c\par
we get\par
a\par
b\par
\f0\'d7\par
b\par
c\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
\'d7\par
b\par
c\par
,\par
or\par
a\par
c\par
=\par
b\par
d\par
;\par
therefore a : c :: b : d.\par
Hence, Proposition [A], if a be greater than c, b is greater than d; if equal, equal;\par
and if less, less.\par
PROP. XV.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
Magnitudes have the same ratio which all equimultiples of them have.\par
Let a, b be two magnitudes, then the ratio a : b is equal to the ratio ma : mb.\par
Dem.\emdash The ratio a : b =\par
a\par
b\par
, and the ratio of ma : mb =\par
ma\par
mb ; but since the\par
value of a fraction is not altered by multiplying its numerator and denominator\par
by the same number,\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
ma\par
mb ;\par
therefore a : b :: ma : mb.\par
PROP. XVI\emdash Theorem.\par
If four magnitudes of the same kind be proportionals they are also\par
proportionals by alternation (alternando).\par
Let a : b :: c : d, then a : c :: b : d.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: c : d,\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
,\par
128\par
and multiplying each by b\par
c\par
, we get\par
a\par
b\par
.\par
b\par
c\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
.\par
b\par
c\par
,\par
or\par
a\par
c\par
=\par
b\par
d\par
;\par
therefore a : c :: b : d.\par
PROP. XVII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If four magnitudes be proportional, the difference between the first and second\par
: the second :: the difference between the third and fourth : the fourth (dividendo).\par
Let a : b :: c : d : then a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b : b :: c \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d : d;\par
Dem.\f1\emdash Since a : b :: c : d,\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
;\par
therefore a\par
b\par
\f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 1 =\par
c\par
d\par
\f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 1,\par
or\par
a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b\par
b\par
=\par
c \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d\par
d\par
;\par
therefore a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b : b :: c \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d : d.\par
PROP. XVIII.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If four magnitudes be proportionals, the sum of the first and second : the\par
second :: the sum of the third and fourth : the fourth (componendo).\par
Let a : b :: c : d; then a + b : b :: c + d : d.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: c : d,\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
;\par
therefore a\par
b\par
+ 1 =\par
c\par
d\par
+ 1,\par
or\par
a + b\par
b\par
=\par
c + d\par
d\par
;\par
therefore a + b : b :: c + d : d.\par
129\par
PROP. XIX.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a whole magnitude be to another whole at a magnitude taken from the\par
first it to a magnitude taken from the second, the first remainder : the second\par
remainder :: the first whole : the second whole.\par
Let a : b :: c : d, c and d being less than a and b;\par
then a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c : b \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d :: a : b.\par
Dem.\f1\emdash Since a : b :: c : d,\par
then a : c :: b : d [alternando],\par
and c : a :: d : b [invertendo];\par
therefore c\par
a\par
=\par
d\par
b\par
,\par
and 1 \f2\u8722?\f0\par
c\par
a\par
= 1 \f2\u8722?\f0\par
d\par
b\par
,\par
or\par
a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c\par
a\par
=\par
b \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d\par
b\par
.\par
Hence a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c : b \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d :: a : b.\par
Prop. E.\f1\emdash Theorem (Simson).\par
If four magnitudes be proportional, the first : its excess above the second :: the\par
third : its excess above the fourth (convertendo).\par
Let a : b :: c : d; then a : a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b :: c : c \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d.\par
Dem.\f1\emdash Since a : b :: c : d,\par
a\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
;\par
therefore a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b\par
b\par
=\par
c \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d\par
d\par
[Dem. of xvii.],\par
therefore a\par
b\par
\'f7\par
a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b\par
b\par
=\par
c\par
d\par
\'f7\par
c \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d\par
d\par
,\par
or\par
a\par
a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b\par
=\par
c\par
c \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d\par
,\par
therefore a : a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b :: c : c \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d.\par
PROP. XX.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If there be two sets of three magnitudes, which taken two by two in direct\par
order have equal ratios, then if the first of either set be greater than the third,\par
the first of the other set is greater than the third; if equal, equal; and if less, less.\par
130\par
Let a, b, c; a\par
0\par
, b\par
0\par
, c\par
0 be the two sets of magnitudes, and let the ratio a : b =\par
a\par
0\par
: b\par
0\par
, and b : c = b\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
; then, if a be greater than, equal to, or less than c, a\par
0\par
will be greater than, equal to, or less than c\par
0\par
.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: a\par
0\par
: b\par
0\par
,\par
we have a\par
b\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
b\par
0\par
,\par
In like manner, b\par
c\par
=\par
b\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
,\par
Hence a\par
b\par
\f0\'d7\par
b\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
b\par
0\par
\'d7\par
b\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
,\par
or\par
a\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
.\par
Therefore if a be greater than c, a\par
0\par
is greater than c\par
0\par
; if equal, equal; and if\par
less, less.\par
PROP. XXI.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If there be two sets of three magnitudes, which taken two by two in transverse\par
order have equal ratios; then, if the first of either set be greater than the third,\par
the first of the other set is greater than the third; if equal, equal; and if less, less.\par
Let a, b, c; a\par
0\par
, b\par
0\par
, c\par
0 be the two sets of magnitudes, and let the ratio a : b =\par
b\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
, and b : c = a\par
0\par
: b\par
0\par
. Then, if a be greater than, equal to, or less than c, a\par
0\par
will be greater than, equal to, or less than c\par
0\par
.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: b\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
,\par
we have a\par
b\par
=\par
b\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
.\par
In like manner, b\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
b\par
0\par
.\par
Hence, multiplying a\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
.\par
Therefore, if a be greater than c, a\par
0\par
is greater than c\par
0\par
; if equal, equal; if less,\par
less.\par
PROP. XXII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If there be two sets of magnitudes, which, taken two by two in direct order,\par
have equal ratios, then the first : the last of the first set :: the first : the last of\par
the second set (\ldblquote ex aequali,\rdblquote  or \ldblquote ex aequo\rdblquote ).\par
131\par
Let a, b, c; a\par
0\par
, b\par
0\par
, c\par
0 be the two sets of magnitudes, and if a : b :: a\par
0\par
: b\par
0\par
, and\par
b : c :: b\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
, then a : c :: a\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: a\par
0\par
: b\par
0\par
,\par
we have a\par
b\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
b\par
0\par
In like manner, b\par
c\par
=\par
b\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
.\par
Hence, multiplying, a\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
.\par
Therefore a : c :: a\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
,\par
and similarly for any number of magnitudes in each set.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If the ratio b : c be equal to the ratio a : b, then a, b, c will be in\par
continued proportion, and so will a\par
0\par
, b\par
0\par
, c\par
0\par
. Hence [Def. xii. Annotation 3],\par
a\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
2\par
b\par
2\par
and a\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
=\par
a\par
02\par
b\par
02\par
;\par
but a\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
. [xxii.]\par
Therefore a\par
2\par
b\par
2\par
=\par
a\par
02\par
b\par
02\par
.\par
Hence, if a : b :: a\par
0\par
: b\par
0\par
,\par
a\par
2\par
: b\par
2\par
:: a\par
02\par
: b\par
02\par
Or if four magnitudes be proportional, their squares are proportional.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If four magnitudes be proportional, their cubes are proportional.\par
PROP. XXIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If there be two sets of magnitudes, which, taken two by two in transverse\par
order, have equal ratios; then the first : the last of the first set :: the first : the\par
last of the second set (\ldblquote ex aequo perturbato\rdblquote ).\par
Let a, b, c; a\par
0\par
, b\par
0\par
, c\par
0 be the two sets of magnitudes, and let the ratio a : b =\par
b\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
, and b : c = a\par
0\par
: b\par
0\par
; then a : c :: a\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: b\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
,\par
we have a\par
b\par
=\par
b\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
.\par
In like manner, b\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
b\par
0\par
.\par
Hence, multiplying, a\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
;\par
therefore a : c :: a\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
,\par
132\par
and similarly for any number of magnitudes in each set.\par
This Proposition and the preceding one may be included in one enunciation,\par
thus: \ldblquote Ratios compounded of equal ratios are equal.\rdblquote\par
PROP. XXIV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two magnitudes of the same kind (a, b) have to a third magnitude (c)\par
ratios equal to those which two other magnitudes (a\par
0\par
, b0\par
) have to a third (c\par
0\par
),\par
then the sum (a + b) of the first two has the same ratio to their third (c) which\par
the sum (a\par
0 + b\par
0\par
) of the other two magnitudes has to their third (c\par
0\par
).\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : c :: a\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
,\par
we have a\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
.\par
In like manner, b\par
c\par
=\par
b\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
;\par
therefore, adding, a + b\par
c\par
=\par
a\par
0 + b\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
.\par
Hence a + b : c :: a\par
0 + b\par
0\par
: c\par
0\par
.\par
PROP. XXV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If four magnitudes of the same kind be proportionals, the sum of the greatest\par
and least is greater than the sum of the other two.\par
Let a : b :: c : d; then, if a be the greatest, d will be the least [xiv. and a].\par
It is required to prove that a + d is greater than b + c.\par
Dem.\emdash Since a : b :: c : d,\par
a : c :: b : d [alternando];\par
therefore a : a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c :: b : b \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d [E].;\par
but a is greater than b (hyp.),\par
therefore a \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c is greater than b \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d [xiv.].\par
Hence a + d is greater than b + c.\par
Questions for Examination on Book V.\par
1. What is the subject-matter of this book?\par
2. When is one magnitude said to be a multiple of another?\par
3. What is a submultiple or measure?\par
4. What are equimultiples?\par
5. What is the ratio of two commensurable magnitudes?\par
6. What is meant by the ratio of incommensurable magnitudes?\par
7. Give an Illustration of the ratio of incommensurables.\par
8. What are the terms of a ratio called?\par
133\par
9. What is a ratio of greater inequality?\par
10. What is a ratio of lesser inequality?\par
11. What is the product of two ratios called? Ans. The ratio compounded of these ratios.\par
12. What is duplicate ratio?\par
13. What is Euclid\f1\rquote\f0 s definition of duplicate ratio?\par
14. Give another definition.\par
15. Define triplicate ratio.\par
16. What is proportion? Ans. equality of ratios.\par
17. Give Euclid\f1\rquote\f0 s definition of proportion.\par
18. How many ratios in a proportion?\par
19. What are the Latin terms in use to denote some of the Propositions of Book V.?\par
20. When is a line divided harmonically?\par
21. When a line is divided harmonically, what are corresponding pairs of points called?\par
Ans. Harmonic conjugates.\par
22. What are reciprocal ratios?\par
23. Give one enunciation that will include Propositions xxii., xxiii. of Book V.\par
Exercises on Book V.\par
Def. I.\f1\emdash A ratio whose antecedent is greater than its consequent is called a ratio of greater\par
inequality; and a ratio whose antecedent is less than its consequent, a ratio of lesser inequality.\par
Def. II.\emdash A right line is said to be cut harmonically when it is divided internally and\par
externally in any ratios that are equal in magnitude.\par
1. A ratio of greater inequality is increased by diminishing its terms by the same quantity,\par
and diminished by increasing its terms by the same quantity.\par
2. A ratio of lesser inequality is diminished by diminishing its terms by the same quantity,\par
and increased by increasing its terms by the same quantity.\par
3. If four magnitudes be proportionals, the sum of the first and second is to their difference\par
as the sum of the third and fourth is to their difference (componendo et dividendo).\par
4. If two sets of four magnitudes be proportionals, and if we multiply corresponding terms\par
together, the products are proportionals.\par
5. If two sets of four magnitudes be proportionals, and if we divide corresponding terms,\par
the quotients are proportionals.\par
6. If four magnitudes be proportionals, their squares, cubes, &c., are proportionals.\par
7. It two proportions have three terms of one respectively equal to three corresponding\par
terms of the other, the remaining term of the first is equal to the remaining term of the second.\par
8. If three magnitudes be continual proportionals, the first is to the third as the square\par
of the difference between the first and second is to the square of the difference between the\par
second and third.\par
9. If a line AB, cut harmonically in C and D, be bisected in O; prove OC, OB, OD are\par
continual proportionals.\par
10. In the same case, if O0 be the middle point of CD; prove OO02 = OB2 + O0D2\par
.\par
11. And AB(AC + AD) = 2AC . AD, or\par
1\par
AC\par
+\par
1\par
AD\par
=\par
2\par
AB\par
.\par
12. And CD(AD + BD) = 2AD . BD, or\par
1\par
BD\par
+\par
1\par
AD\par
=\par
2\par
CD\par
.\par
13. And AB . CD = 2AD . CB.\par
134\par
BOOK VI.\par
APPLICATION OF THE THEORY OF PROPORTION\par
DEFINITIONS.\par
i. Similar Rectilineal Figures are those whose several angles are equal, each\par
to each, and whose sides about the equal angles are proportional.\par
Similar figures agree in shape; if they agree also in size, they are congruent.\par
1. When the shape of a figure is given, it is said to be given in species. Thus a triangle\par
whose angles are given is given in species. Hence similar figures are of the same species.\par
2. When the size of a figure is given, it is said to be given in magnitude; for instance, a\par
square whose side is of given length.\par
3. When the place which a figure occupies is known, it is said to be given in position.\par
ii. A right line is said to be cut at a point in extreme and mean ratio when\par
the whole line is to the greater segment as the greater segment is to the less.\par
iii. If three quantities of the same kind be in continued proportion, the\par
middle term is called a mean proportional between the other two.\par
Magnitudes in continued proportion are also said to be in geometrical progression.\par
iv. If four quantities of the same kind be in continued proportion, the two\par
middle terms are called two mean proportionals between the other two.\par
v. The altitude of any figure is the length of the perpendicular from its\par
highest point to its base.\par
vi. Two corresponding angles of two figures have the sides about them\par
reciprocally proportional, when a side of the first is to a side of the second as\par
the remaining side of the second is to the remaining side of the first.\par
This is evidently equivalent to saying that a side of the first is to a side of the second in\par
the reciprocal ratio of the remaining side of the first to the remaining side of the second.\par
PROP. I.\emdash Theorem.\par
Triangles (ABC, ACD) and parallelograms (EC, CF) which have the same\par
altitude are to one another as their bases (BC, CD).\par
Dem.\emdash Produce BD both\par
ways, and cut off any number of\par
parts BG, GH, &c., each equal to\par
CB, and any number DK, KL,\par
each equal to CD. Join AG, AH,\par
AK, AL.\par
Now, since the several bases CB, BG, GH are all equal, the triangles ACB,\par
ABG, AGH are also all equal [I. xxxviii.]. Therefore the triangle ACH is the\par
same multiple of ACB that the base CH is of the base CB. In like manner,\par
135\par
the triangle ACL is the same multiple of ACD that the base CL is of the base\par
CD; and it is evident that [I. xxxviii.] if the base HC be greater than CL,\par
the triangle HAC is greater than CAL; if equal, equal; and if less, less. Now\par
we have four magnitudes: the base BC is the first, the base CD the second,\par
the triangle ABC the third, and the triangle ACD the fourth. We have taken\par
equimultiples of the first and third, namely, the base CH, and the triangle\par
ACH; also equimultiples of the second and fourth, namely, the base CL, and\par
the triangle ACL; and we have proved that according as the multiple of the first\par
is greater than, equal to, or less than the multiple of the second, the multiple\par
of the third is greater than, equal to, or less than the multiple of the fourth.\par
Hence [V. Def. v.] the base BC : CD :: the triangle ABC : ACD.\par
2. The parallelogram EC is double of the triangle ABC [I. xxxiv.], and the\par
parallelogram CF is double of the triangle ACD. Hence [V. xv.] EC : CF ::\par
the triangle ABC : ACD; but ABC : ACD :: BC : CD (Part I.). Therefore\par
[V. xi.] EC : CF :: the base BC : CD.\par
Or thus: Let A, A0 denote the areas of the triangles ABC, ACD, respectively, and P\par
their common altitude; then [II. i., Cor. 1],\par
A = 1\par
2\par
P . BC, A0 = 1\par
2\par
P . CD.\par
Hence\par
A\par
A0\par
=\par
BC\par
CD\par
, or A : A\par
0\par
:: BC : CD.\par
In extending this proof to parallelograms we have only to use P instead of 1\par
2\par
P.\par
PROP. II.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (DE) be parallel to a side (BC) of a triangle (ABC), it divides\par
the remaining sides, measured from the opposite angle (A), proportionally; and,\par
conversely, If two sides of a triangle, measured from an angle, be cut proportionally, the line joining the points of section is parallel to the third side.\par
1. It is required to prove that AD : DB :: AE : EC.\par
Dem.\emdash Join BE, CD. The triangles BDE, CED\par
are on the same base DE, and between the same parallels BC, DE. Hence [I. xxxvii.] they are equal, and\par
therefore [V. vii.] the triangle ADE : BDE :: ADE :\par
CDE;\par
but ADE : BDE :: AD : DB [i.],\par
and ADE : CDE :: AE : EC [i.].\par
Hence AD : DB :: AE : EC.\par
2. If AD : DB :: AE : EC, it is required to prove that DE is parallel to BC.\par
Dem.\emdash Let the same construction be made;\par
then AD : DB :: the triangle ADE : BDE [i.].\par
and AE : EC :: the triangle ADE : CDE [i.];\par
but AD : DB :: AE : EC (hyp.).\par
Hence ADE : BDE :: ADE : CDE.\par
136\par
Therefore [V. ix.] the triangle BDE is equal to CDE, and they are on the same\par
base DE, and on the same side of it; hence they are between the same parallels\par
[I. xxxix.]. Therefore DE is parallel to BC.\par
Observation.\emdash The line DE may cut the sides AB, AC produced through B, C, or through\par
the angle A; but evidently a separate figure for each of these cases is unnecessary.\par
Exercise.\par
If two lines be cut by three or more parallels, the intercepts on one are proportional to\par
the corresponding intercepts on the other.\par
PROP. III.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a line (AD) bisect any angle (A) of a triangle (ABC), it divides the\par
opposite side (BC) into segments proportional to the adjacent sides. Conversely,\par
If the segments (BD, DC) into which a line (AD) drawn from any angle (A)\par
of a triangle divides the opposite side be proportional to the adjacent sides, that\par
line bisects the angle (A).\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Through C draw CE parallel to AD,\par
to meet BA produced in E. Because BA meets the\par
parallels AD, EC, the angle BAD [I. xxix.] is equal\par
to AEC; and because AC meets the parallels AD,\par
EC, the angle DAC is equal to ACE; but the angle\par
BAD is equal to DAC (hyp.); therefore the angle\par
ACE is equal to AEC; therefore AE is equal to AC\par
[I. vi.]. Again, because AD is parallel to EC, one of\par
the sides of the triangle BEC, BD : DC :: BA : AE [ii.]; but AE has been\par
proved equal to AC. Therefore BD : DC :: BA : AC.\par
2. If BD : DC :: BA : AC, the angle BAC is bisected.\par
Dem.\emdash Let the same construction be made.\par
Because AD is parallel to EC, BA : AE :: BD : DC [ii.]; but BD : DC ::\par
BA : AC (hyp.). Therefore [V. xi.] BA : AE :: BA : AC, and hence [V. ix.]\par
AE is equal to AC; therefore the angle AEC is equal to ACE; but AEC is\par
equal to BAD [I. xxix.], and ACE to DAC; hence BAD is equal to DAC, and\par
the line AD bisects the angle BAC.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If the line AD bisect the external vertical angle\par
CAE, BA : AC :: BD : DC, and conversely.\par
Dem.\emdash Cut off AE = AC. Join ED. Then\par
the triangles ACD, AED are evidently congruent;\par
therefore the angle EDB is bisected; hence [iii.] BA :\par
AE :: BD : DE; or BA : AC :: BD : DC.\par
2. Exercise 1 has been proved by quoting Proposition iii. Prove it independently, and prove iii. as\par
an inference from it.\par
3. The internal and the external bisectors of the vertical angle of a triangle divide the\par
base harmonically (see Definition, p. 191).\par
137\par
4. Any line intersecting the legs of any angle is cut harmonically by the internal and\par
external bisectors of the angle.\par
5. Any line intersecting the legs of a right angle is cut harmonically by any two lines\par
through its vertex which make equal angles with either of its sides.\par
6. If the base of a triangle be given in magnitude and position, and the ratio of the sides,\par
the locus of the vertex is a circle which divides the base harmonically in the ratio of the sides.\par
7. If a, b, c denote the sides of a triangle ABC, and D, D0\par
the points where the internal\par
and external bisectors of A meet BC; prove\par
DD0 =\par
2abc\par
b\par
2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c\par
2\par
.\par
8. In the same case, if E, E0\par
, F, F\par
0 be points similarly determined on the sides CA, AB,\par
respectively; prove\par
1\par
DD0\par
+\par
1\par
EE0\par
+\par
1\par
F F0\par
= 0,\par
and\par
a\par
2\par
DD0\par
+\par
b\par
2\par
EE0\par
+\par
c\par
2\par
F F0\par
= 0.\par
PROP. IV.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
The sides about the equal angles of equiangular triangles (BAC, CDE) are\par
proportional, and those which are opposite to the equal angles are homologous.\par
Dem.\emdash Let the sides BC, CE, which are opposite to the equal angles A and D, be conceived\par
to be placed so as to form one continuous line,\par
the triangles being on the same side, and so that\par
the equal angles BCA, CED may not have a\par
common vertex.\par
Now, the sum of the angles ABC, BCA is\par
less than two right angles; but BCA is equal to\par
BED (hyp.). Therefore the sum of the angles ABE, BED is less than two\par
right angles; hence [I., Axiom xii.] the lines AB, ED will meet if produced.\par
Let them meet in F. Again, because the angle BCA is equal to BEF, the\par
line CA [I. xxviii.] is parallel to EF. In like manner, BF is parallel to CD;\par
therefore the figure ACDF is a parallelogram; hence AC is equal to DF, and\par
CD is equal to AF. Now, because AC is parallel to F E, BA : AF :: BC : CE\par
[ii.]; but AF is equal to CD, therefore BA : CD :: BC : CE; hence [V. xvi.];\par
AB : BC :: DC : CE. Again, because CD is parallel to BF, BC : CE :: F D :\par
DE; but F D is equal to AC, therefore BC : CE :: AC : DE; hence [V. xvi.]\par
BC : AC :: CE : DE. Therefore we have proved that AB : BC :: DC : CE,\par
and that BC : CA :: CE : ED. Hence (ex aequali) AB : AC :: DC : DE.\par
Therefore the sides about the equal angles are proportional.\par
This Proposition may also be proved very simply by superposition. Thus (see fig.,\par
Prop. ii.): let the two triangles be ABC, ADE; let the second triangle ADE be conceived to\par
be placed on ABC, so that its two sides AD, AE may fall on the sides AB, AC; then, since the\par
angle ADE is equal to ABC, the side DE is parallel to BC. Hence [ii.] AD : DB :: AE : EC;\par
hence AD : AB :: AE : AC, and [V. xvi.] AD : AE :: AB : AC. Therefore the sides about\par
the equal angles BAC, DAE are proportional, and similarly for the others.\par
138\par
It can be proved by this Proposition that two lines which meet at infinity are parallel.\par
For, let I denote the point at infinity through which the two given lines pass, and draw any\par
two parallels intersecting them in the points A, B; A0\par
, B0\par
; then the triangles AIB, A0\par
IB0 are\par
equiangular; therefore AI : AB :: A0\par
I : A0B0\par
; but the first term of the proportion is equal\par
to the third; therefore [V. xiv.] the second term AB is equal to the fourth A0B0\par
, and, being\par
parallel to it, the lines AA0\par
, BB0\par
[I. xxxiii.] are parallel.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If two circles intercept equal chords AB, A0B0 on any secant, the tangents AT, A0T to\par
the circles at the points of intersection are to one another as the radii of the circles.\par
2. If two circles intercept on any secant chords that have a given ratio, the tangents to\par
the circles at the points of intersection have a given ratio, namely, the ratio compounded of\par
the direct ratio of the radii and the inverse ratio of the chords.\par
3. Being given a circle and a line, prove that a point may be found, such that the rectangle\par
of the perpendiculars let fall on the line from the points of intersection of the circle with any\par
chord through the point shall be given.\par
4. AB is the diameter of a semicircle ADB; CD a perpendicular to AB; draw through A\par
a chord AF of the semicircle meeting CD in E, so that the ratio CE : EF may be given.\par
PROP. V.\endash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (ABC, DEF) have their sides proportional (BA : AC ::\par
ED : DF; AC : CB :: DF : F E) they are equiangular, and those angles are\par
equal which are subtended by the homologous sides.\par
Dem.\emdash At the points D, E make the\par
angles EDG, DEG equal to the angles A,\par
B of the triangle ABC. Then [I. xxxii.]\par
the triangles ABC, DEG are equiangular.\par
Therefore BA : AC :: ED : DG [iv.];\par
but BA : AC :: ED : DF (hyp.).\par
Therefore DG is equal to DF. In like manner it may be proved that EG is equal to\par
EF. Hence the triangles EDF, EDG have\par
the sides ED, DF in one equal to the sides\par
ED, DG in the other, and the base EF\par
equal to the base EG. Hence [I. viii.] they are equiangular; but the triangle\par
DEG is equiangular to ABC. Therefore the triangle DEF is equiangular to\par
ABC.\par
Observation.\emdash In VI. Def. i. two conditions are laid down as necessary for the similitude\par
of rectilineal figures. 1. The equality of angles; 2. The proportionality of sides. Now, from\par
Propositions iv. and v., we see that if two triangles possess either condition, they also possess\par
the other. Triangles are unique in this respect. In all other rectilineal figures one of the conditions may exist without the other. Thus, two quadrilaterals may have their sides proportional\par
without having equal angles, or vice vers\'88a.\par
139\par
PROP. VI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (ABC, DEF) have one angle (A) in one equal to one angle\par
(D) in the other, and the sides about these angles proportional (BA : AC ::\par
ED : DF), the triangles are equiangular, and have those angles equal which are\par
opposite to the homologous sides.\par
Dem.\emdash Make the same construction as in the last Proposition; then the\par
triangles ABC, DEG are equiangular.\par
Therefore BA : AC :: ED : DG [iv.];\par
but BA : AC :: ED : DF (hyp.).\par
Therefore DG is equal to DF. Again, because the angle EDG is equal to BAC\par
(const.), and BAC equal to EDF (hyp.), the angle EDG is equal to EDF; and\par
it has been proved that DG is equal to DF, and DE is common; hence the\par
triangles EDG and EDF are equiangular; but EDG is equiangular to BAC.\par
Therefore EDF is equiangular to BAC.\par
[It is easy to see, as in the case of Proposition iv., that an immediate proof of this\par
Proposition can also be got from Proposition ii.].\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If the ratio of two sides of a triangle be given, and the angle between\par
them, the triangle is given in species.\par
PROP. VII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (ABC, DEF) have one angle (A) one equal to one angle\par
(D) in the other, the sides about two other angles (B, E) proportional (AB :\par
BC :: DE : EF), and the remaining angles (C, F) of the same species (i. e.\par
either both acute or both not acute), the triangles are similar.\par
Dem.\emdash If the angles B and E are not\par
equal, one must be greater than the other.\par
Suppose ABC to be the greater, and that\par
the part ABG is equal to DEF, then the\par
triangles ABG, DEF have two angles in\par
one equal to two angles in the other, and\par
are [I. xxxii.] equiangular.\par
Therefore AB : BG :: DE : EF [iv.];\par
but AB : BC :: DE : EF (hyp.).\par
Therefore BG is equal to BC. Hence the angles BCG, BGC must be each acute\par
[I. xvii.]; therefore AGB must be obtuse; hence DF E, which is equal to it, is\par
obtuse; and it has been proved that ACB is acute; therefore the angles ACB,\par
DF E are of different species; but (hyp.) they are of the same species, which\par
is absurd. Hence the angles B and E are not unequal, that is, they are equal.\par
Therefore the triangles are equiangular.\par
140\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If two triangles ABC, DEF have two sides in one proportional to\par
two sides in the other, AB : BC :: DE : EF, and the angles A, D opposite one\par
pair of homologous sides equal, the angles C, F opposite the other are either\par
equal or supplemental. This Proposition is nearly identical with vii.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If either of the angles C, F be right, the other must be right.\par
PROP. VIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
The triangles (ACD, BCD) into which a right-angled triangle (ACB) is\par
divided, by the perpendicular (CD) from the right angle (C) on the hypotenuse,\par
are similar to the whole and to one another.\par
Dem.\emdash Since the two triangles ADC, ACB have the angle A common, and\par
the angles ADC, ACB equal, each being right, they are [I. xxxii.] equiangular;\par
hence [iv.] they are similar. In like manner it may be proved that BDC is\par
similar to ABC. Hence ADC, CDB are each similar to ACD, and therefore\par
they are similar to one another.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The perpendicular CD is a mean proportional between the segments AD, DB of the hypotenuse.\par
For, since the triangles ADC, CDB are equiangular, we have AD : DC :: DC : DB; hence DC is\par
a mean proportional between AD, DB (Def. iii.).\par
Cor. 2.\emdash BC is a mean proportional between AB, BD; and AC between\par
AB, AD.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash The segments AD, DB are in the duplicate of AC : CB, or in other\par
words, AD : DB :: AC2\par
: CB2\par
,\par
Cor. 4.\emdash BA : AD in the duplicate ratios of BA : AC; and AB : BD in the\par
duplicate ratio of AB : BC.\par
PROP. IX.\emdash Problem.\par
From a given right line (AB) to cut off any part required (i.e. to cut off any\par
required submultiple)\par
.\par
Sol.\emdash Let it be required, for instance, to cut off the fourth part. Draw AF,\par
making any angle with AB, and in AF take any point C, and cut off (I. iii.)\par
the parts CD, DE, EF each equal to AC. Join BF, and draw CG parallel to\par
BF. AG is the fourth part of AB.\par
Dem.\emdash Since CG is parallel to the side BF of\par
the triangle ABF, AC : AF :: AG : AB [ii.]; but\par
AC is the fourth part of AF (const.). Hence AG is\par
the fourth part of AB [V., d.]. In the same manner,\par
any other required submultiple may be cut off.\par
Proposition x., Book I., is a particular case of\par
this Proposition.\par
141\par
PROP. X.\emdash Problem.\par
To divide a given undivided line (AB) similarly to a given divided line (CD).\par
Sol.\emdash Draw AG, making any angle with\par
AB, and cut off the parts AH, HI, IG respectively equal to the parts CE, EF, F D\par
of the given divided line CD. Join BG, and\par
draw HK, IL, each parallel to BG. AB will\par
be divided similarly to CD.\par
Dem.\emdash Through H draw HN parallel to\par
AB, cutting IL in M. Now in the triangle\par
ALI, HK is parallel to IL. Hence [ii.] AK : KL :: AH : HI, that is :: CE :\par
EF (const.). Again, in the triangle HNG, MI is parallel to NG. Therefore\par
[ii.] HM : MN :: HI : IG; but [I. xxxiv.] HM is equal to KL, MN is\par
equal to LB, HI is equal to EF, and IG is equal to F D (const.). Therefore\par
KL : LB :: EF : F D. Hence the line AB is divided similarly to the line CD.\par
Exercises.\par
1. To divide a given line AB internally or externally in the ratio of two given lines, m, n.\par
Sol.\emdash Through A and B draw any two parallels AC and BD in opposite directions. Cut\par
off AC = m, and BD = n, and join CD; the joining line will divide AB internally at E in the\par
ratio of m : n.\par
2. If BD0 be drawn in the same direction with AC, as denoted by the dotted line, then\par
CD0 will cut AB externally at E0\par
in the ratio of m : n.\par
Cor.\emdash The two points E, E0 divide AB harmonically.\par
This problem is manifestly equivalent to the following:\emdash Given the sum or difference of\par
two lines and their ratio, to find the lines.\par
3. Any line AE0\par
, through the middle point B of the base DD0 of a triangle DCD0\par
, is cut\par
harmonically by the sides of the triangle and a parallel to the base through the vertex.\par
4. Given the sum of the squares on two lines and their ratio; find the lines.\par
5. Given the difference of the squares on two lines and their ratio; find the lines.\par
6. Given the base and ratio of the sides of a triangle; construct it when any of the following\par
data is given:\emdash 1, the area; 2, the difference on the squares of the sides; 3, the sum of the\par
squares on the sides; 4, the vertical angle; 5, the difference of the base angles.\par
142\par
PROP. XI.\emdash Problem.\par
To find a third proportional to two given lines (X, Y ).\par
Sol.\emdash Draw any two lines AC, AE making an angle. Cut off AB equal X,\par
BC equal Y , and AD equal Y . Join BD, and draw CE parallel to BD, then\par
DE is the third proportional required.\par
Dem.\emdash In the triangle CAE,\par
BD is parallel to CE; therefore AB :\par
BC :: AD : DE [ii.]; but AB is equal\par
to X, and BC, AD each equal to Y .\par
Therefore X : Y :: Y : DE. Hence\par
DE is a third proportional to X and\par
Y .\par
Another solution can be inferred from Proposition viii. For if AD, DC in that Proposition\par
be respectively equal to X and Y , then DB will be the third proportional. Or again, if in the\par
diagram, Proposition viii., AD = X, and AC = Y , AB will be the third proportional. Hence\par
may be inferred a method of continuing the proportion to any number of terms.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If AO\f2\u8486?\f1  \f0 be a triangle, having the\par
side A\f2\u8486?\f1  \f0 greater than AO; then if we cut off\par
AB = AO, draw BB0 parallel to AO, cut\par
off BC = BB0\par
, &c., the series of lines AB,\par
BC, CD, &c., are in continual proportion.\par
2. AB \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 BC : AB :: AB : A\f2\u8486?\f0 . This is\par
evident by drawing through B0 a parallel\par
to A\f2\u8486?\f0 .\par
PROP. XII.\f1\emdash Problem.\par
To find a fourth proportional to three given lines (X, Y, Z).\par
Sol.\emdash Draw any two lines AC,\par
AE, making an angle; then cut off\par
AB equal X, BC equal Y , AD\par
equal Z. Join BD, and draw CE\par
parallel to BD. DE will be the\par
fourth proportional required.\par
Dem.\emdash Since BD is parallel to\par
CE, we have [ii.] AB : BC :: AD :\par
DE; therefore X : Y :: Z : DE. Hence DE is a fourth proportional to X, Y ,\par
Z.\par
Or thus: Take two lines AD, BC intersecting\par
in O. Make OA = X, OB = Y , OC = Z, and\par
describe a circle through the points A, B, C [IV. v.]\par
cutting AD in D. OD will be the fourth proportional\par
required.\par
The demonstration is evident from the similarity\par
of the triangles AOB and COD.\par
143\par
PROP. XIII.\emdash Problem.\par
To find a mean proportional between two given lines. (X, Y ).\par
Sol.\emdash Take on any line\par
AC parts AB, BC respectively equal to X, Y . On AC\par
describe a semicircle ADC.\par
Erect BD at right angles to\par
AC, meeting the semicircle\par
in D. BD will be the mean\par
proportional required.\par
Dem.\emdash Join AD, DC. Since ADC is a semicircle, the angle ADC is right\par
[III. xxxi.]. Hence, since ADC is a right-angled triangle, and BD a perpendicular from the right angle on the hypotenuse, BD is a mean proportional\par
[viii. Cor. 1] between AB, BC; that is, BD is a mean proportional between X\par
and Y .\par
Exercises.\par
1. Another solution may be inferred from Proposition viii., Cor. 2.\par
2. If through any point within a circle the chord be drawn, which is bisected in that point,\par
its half is a mean proportional between the segments of any other chord passing through the\par
same point.\par
3. The tangent to a circle from any external point is a mean proportional between the\par
segments of any secant passing through the same point.\par
4. If through the middle point C of any arc of a circle any secant be drawn cutting the\par
chord of the arc in D, and the circle again in E, the chord of half the arc is a mean proportional\par
between CD and CE.\par
5. If a circle be described touching another circle internally and two parallel chords, the\par
perpendicular from the centre of the former on the diameter of the latter, which bisects the\par
chords, is a mean proportional between the two extremes of the three segments into which\par
the diameter is divided by the chords.\par
6. If a circle be described touching a semicircle and its diameter, the diameter of the circle\par
is a harmonic mean between the segments into which the diameter of the semicircle is divided\par
at the point of contact.\par
7. State and prove the Proposition corresponding to Ex. 5, for external contact of the\par
circles.\par
PROP. XIV.\emdash Theorem.\par
1. Equiangular parallelograms (AB, CD)\par
which are equal in area have the sides about\par
the equal angles reciprocally proportional\emdash\par
AC : CE :: GC : CB.\par
2. Equiangular parallelograms which have\par
the sides about the equal angles reciprocally\par
proportional are equal in area.\par
Dem.\emdash Let AC, CE be so placed as to\par
form one right line, and that the equal angles\par
144\par
ACB, ECG may be vertically opposite. Now, since the angle ACB is equal to\par
ECG, to each add BCE, and we have the sum of the angles ACB, BCE equal\par
to the sum of the angles ECG, BCE; but the sum of ACB, BCE is [I. xiii.]\par
two right angles. Therefore the sum of ECG, BCE is two right angles. Hence\par
[I. xiv.] BC, CG form one right line. Complete the parallelogram BE.\par
Again, since the parallelograms AB, CD are equal (hyp.),\par
AB : CF :: CD : CF [V. vii.];\par
but AB : CF :: AC : CE [i.];\par
and CD : CF :: GC : CB [i.];\par
therefore AC : CE :: GC : CB;\par
that is, the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional.\par
2. Let AC : CE :: GC : CB, to prove the parallelograms AB, CD are equal.\par
Dem.\emdash Let the same construction be made, we have\par
AB : CF :: AC : CE [i.];\par
and CD : CF :: GC : CB [i.];\par
but AC : CE :: GC : CB (hyp.).\par
Therefore AB : CF :: CD : CF.\par
Hence AB = CD [V. ix.];\par
that is, the parallelograms are equal.\par
Or thus: Join HE, BE, HD, BD. The HC = twice the 4 HBE, and the CD =\par
twice the 4 BDE. Therefore the 4 HBE = BDE, and [I. xxxix.] HD is parallel to BE.\par
Hence\par
HB : BF :: DE : EF; that is, AC : CE :: GC : CB.\par
2. May be proved by reversing this demonstration.\par
Another demonstration of this Proposition may be got by producing the lines HA and\par
DG to meet in I. Then [I. xliii.] the points I, C, F are collinear, and the Proposition is\par
evident.\par
PROP. XV.\emdash Theorem.\par
1. Two triangles equal in area (ACB, DCE),\par
which have one angle (C) in one equal to one angle\par
(C) in the other, have the sides about these angles reciprocally proportional.\par
2. Two triangles, which have one angle in one equal\par
to one angle in the other, and the sides about these angles reciprocally proportional, are equal in area.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let the equal angles be so placed as to\par
be vertically opposite, and that AC, CD may form one right line; then it may\par
be demonstrated, as in the last Proposition, that BC, CE form one right line.\par
Join BD.\par
145\par
Now since the triangles ACB, DCE are equal,\par
ACB : BCD :: DCE : BCD [V. vii.];\par
but ACB : BCD :: AC : CD [i.],\par
and DCE : BCD :: EC : CB [i.].\par
Therefore AC : CD :: EC : CB;\par
that is, the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional.\par
2. If AC : CD :: EC : CB, to prove the triangle ACB equal to DCE.\par
Dem.\emdash Let the same construction be made, then we have\par
AC : CD :: triangle ACB : BCD [i.],\par
and EC : CB :: triangle DCE : BCD [i.];\par
but AC : CD :: EC : CB (hyp.).\par
Therefore the triangle\par
ACB : BCD :: DCE : BCD.\par
Hence the triangle ACB = DCE [V. ix.]\emdash that is, the triangles are equal.\par
This Proposition might have been appended as a Cor. to the preceding, since the triangles\par
are the halves of equiangular parallelograms, or it may be proved by joining AE, and showing\par
that it is parallel to BD.\par
PROP. XVI.\emdash Theorem.\par
1. If four right lines (AB, CD, E, F) be proportional, the rectangle (AB . F)\par
contained by the extremes is equal to the rectangle (CD . E) contained by the\par
means.\par
2. If the rectangle contained by the extremes of four right lines be equal to\par
the rectangle contained by the means, the four lines are proportional.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Erect AH, CI at right\par
angles to AB and CD, and equal\par
to F and E respectively, and complete the rectangles. Then because\par
AB : CD :: E : F (hyp.), and that E\par
is equal to CI, and F to AH (const.),\par
we have AB : CD :: CI : AH.\par
Hence the parallelograms AG, CK\par
are equiangular, and have the sides\par
about their equal angles reciprocally proportional. Therefore they are [xiv.]\par
equal; but since AH is equal to F, AG is equal to the rectangle AB . F. In like\par
manner, CK is equal to the rectangle CD . E. Hence AB . F = CD . E; that\par
is, the rectangle contained by the extremes is equal to the rectangle contained by\par
the means.\par
146\par
2. If AB . F = CD . E, to prove AB : CD :: E : F.\par
The same construction being made, because AB . F = CD . E, and that\par
F is equal to AH, and E to CI, we have the parallelogram AG = CK; and\par
since these parallelograms are equiangular, the sides about their equal angles\par
are reciprocally proportional. Therefore\par
AB : CD :: CI : AH; that is, AB : CD :: E : F.\par
Or thus: Place the four lines in a concurrent position so\par
that the extremes may form one continuous line, and the means\par
another. Let the four lines so placed be AO, BO, OD, OC.\par
Join AB, CD. Then because AO : OB :: OD : OC, and the\par
angle AOB = DOC, the triangles AOB, COD are equiangular.\par
Hence the four points A, B, C, D are concyclic. Therefore\par
[III. xxxv.] AO . OC = BO . OD.\par
PROP. XVII.\emdash Theorem\par
1. If three right lines (A, B, C) be proportional, the rectangle (A . C) contained by the extremes is equal to the square (B2\par
) of the mean.\par
2. If the rectangle contained by the extremes of three right lines be equal to\par
the square of the mean, the three lines are proportional.\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Assume a line D = B; then because\par
A : B :: B : C, we have A : B :: D : C. Therefore\par
[xvi.] AC = BD; but BD = B2\par
. Therefore AC =\par
B2\par
; that is, the rectangle contained by the extremes\par
is equal to the square of the mean.\par
2. The same construction being made, since\par
AC = B2\par
, we have A . C = B . D; therefore A : B :: D : C; but D = B. Hence\par
A : B :: B : C; that is, the three lines are proportionals.\par
This Proposition may be inferred as a Cor. to the last, which is one of the fundamental\par
Propositions in Mathematics.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If a line CD bisect the vertical angle C of any triangle\par
ACB, its square added to the rectangle AD . DB contained by\par
the segments of the base is equal to the rectangle contained by\par
the sides.\par
Dem.\emdash Describe a circle about the triangle, and produce\par
CD to meet it in E; then it is easy to see that the triangles\par
ACD, ECB are equiangular. Hence [iv.] AC : CD :: CE : CB;\par
therefore AC . CB = CE . CD = CD2 + CD . DE = CD2 +\par
AD . DB [III. xxxv.].\par
2. If the line CD0 bisect the external vertical angle of any triangle ACB, its square subtracted from the rectangle AD0\par
. D0B\par
is equal to AC . CB.\par
3. The rectangle contained by the diameter of the circumscribed circle, and the radius of\par
the inscribed circle of any triangle, is equal to the rectangle contained by the segments of any\par
chord of the circumscribed circle passing through the centre of the inscribed.\par
147\par
Dem.\emdash Let O be the centre of the inscribed circle. Join OB (see foregoing fig.); let fall\par
the perpendicular OG, draw the diameter EF of the circumscribed circle. Now the angle\par
ABE = ECB [III. xxvii.], and ABO = OBC; therefore EBO = sum of OCB, OBC = EOB.\par
Hence EB = EO. Again, the triangles EBF, OGC are equiangular, because EF B, ECB\par
are equal, and EBF, OGC are each right. Therefore, EF : EB :: OC : OG; therefore\par
EF . OG = EB . OC = EO . OC.\par
4. Ex. 3 may be extended to each of the escribed circles of the triangle ACB.\par
5. The rectangle contained by two sides of a triangle is equal to the rectangle contained by\par
the perpendicular and the diameter of the circumscribed circle. For, let CE be the diameter.\par
Join AE. Then the triangles ACE, DCB are equiangular; hence AC : CE :: CD : CB;\par
therefore AC . CB = CD . CE.\par
6. If a circle passing through one of the angles A of a\par
parallelogram ABCD intersect the two sides AB, AD again\par
in the points E, G and the diagonal AC again in F; then\par
AB . AE + AD . AG = AC . AF.\par
Dem.\emdash Join EF, F G, and make the angle ABH =\par
AF E. Then the triangles ABH, AF E are equiangular.\par
Therefore AB : AH :: AF : AE. Hence AB . AE =\par
AF . AH. Again, it is easy to see that the triangles BCH,\par
F AG are equiangular; therefore BC : CH :: AF : AG; hence\par
BC . AG = AF . CH, or AD . AG = AF . CH; but we have\par
proved AB . AE = AF . AH. Hence AD . AG + AB . AE =\par
AF . AC.\par
7. If DE, DF be parallels to the sides of a triangle ABC\par
from any point D in the base, then AB . AE + AC . AF = AD2 + BD . DC. This is an easy\par
deduction from 6.\par
8. If through a point O within a triangle ABC\par
parallels EF, GH, IK to the sides be drawn, the\par
sum of the rectangles of their segments is equal\par
to the rectangle contained by the segments of any\par
chord of the circumscribing circle passing through\par
O.\par
Dem.\emdash AO . AL = AB . AK + AC . AE. (6)\par
But AO2 = AG . AK + AH . AE \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 GO . OH. (7)\par
Hence AO . OL = BG . AK + CH . AE + GO . OH,\par
or AO . OL = EO . OF + IO . OK + GO . OH.\par
9. The rectangle contained by the side of an inscribed\par
square standing on the base of a triangle, and the sum of\par
the base and altitude, is equal to twice the area of the triangle.\par
10. The rectangle contained by the side of an escribed square standing on the base of a\par
triangle, and the difference between the base and altitude, is equal to twice the area of the\par
triangle.\par
148\par
11. If from any point P in the circumference of a circle a perpendicular be drawn to any\par
chord, its square is equal to the rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from the extremities\par
of the chord on the tangent at P.\par
12. If O be the point of intersection of the diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral ABCD, the\par
four rectangles AB . BC, BD . CD, CD . DA, DA . AB, are proportional to the four lines BO,\par
CO, DO, AO.\par
13. The sum of the rectangles of the opposite sides of a\par
cyclic quadrilateral ABCD is equal to the rectangle contained\par
by its diagonals.\par
Dem.\f1\emdash Make the angle DAO = CAB; then the triangles\par
DAO, CAB are equiangular; therefore AD : DO :: AC : CB;\par
therefore AD . BC = AC . DO. Again, the triangles DAC,\par
OAB are equiangular, and CD : AC :: BO : AB; therefore\par
AC . CD = AC . BO. Hence AD . BC+AB . CD = AC . BD.\par
3\par
14. If the quadrilateral ABCD is not cyclic, prove that the\par
three rectangles AB . CD, BC . AD, AC . BD are proportional\par
to the three sides of a triangle which has an angle equal to\par
the sum of a pair of opposite angles of the quadrilateral.\par
15. Prove by using Theorem 11 that if perpendiculars be let fall on the sides and diagonals\par
of a cyclic quadrilateral, from any point in the circumference of the circumscribed circle, the\par
rectangle contained by the perpendiculars on the diagonals is equal to the rectangle contained\par
by the perpendiculars on either pair of opposite sides.\par
16. If AB be the diameter of a semicircle, and P A, P B chords from any point P in the\par
circumference, and if a perpendicular to AB from any point C meet P A, P B in D and E,\par
and the semicircle in F, CF is a mean proportional between CD and CE.\par
PROP. XVIII.\emdash Problem.\par
On a given right line (AB) to construct a rectilineal figure similar to a given\par
one (CDEF G), and similarly placed as regards any side (CD) of the latter.\par
Def.\emdash Similar figures are said to be similarly described upon given right\par
lines, when these lines are homologous sides of the figures.\par
Sol.\emdash Join CE, CF, and construct a triangle ABH on AB equiangular to\par
CDE, and similarly placed as regards CD; that is, make, the angle ABH equal\par
to CDE, and BAH equal to DCE. In like manner construct the triangle HAI\par
3This Proposition is known as Ptolemy\rquote s theorem.\par
149\par
equiangular to ECF, and similarly placed, and lastly, the triangle IAJ equiangular and similarly placed with F CG. Then ABHIJ is the figure required.\par
Dem.\emdash From the construction it is evident that the figures are equiangular, and it is only required to prove that the sides about the equal angles\par
are proportional. Now because the triangle ABH is equiangular to CDE,\par
AB : BH :: CD : DE [iv.]; hence the sides about the equal angles B and D are\par
proportional. Again, from the same triangles we have BH : HA :: DE : EC,\par
and from the triangles IHA, F EC; HA : HI :: EC : EF; therefore (ex \f0\'e6quali)\par
BH : HI :: DE : EF; that is, the sides about the equal angles BHI, DEF are\par
proportional, and so in like manner are the sides about the other equal angles.\par
Hence (Def. i.) the figures are similar.\par
Observation.\f1\emdash In the foregoing construction, the line AB is homologous to CD, and it is\par
evident that we may take AB to be homologous to any other side of the given figure CDEF G.\par
Again, in each case, it the figure ABHIJ be turned round the line AB until it falls on the\par
other side, it will still be similar to the figure CDEF G. Hence on a given line AB there can\par
be constructed two figures each similar to a given figure CDEF G, and having the given line\par
AB homologous to any given side CD of the given figure.\par
The first of the figures thus constructed is said to be directly similar, and the second\par
inversely similar to the given figure. These technical terms are due to Hamilton: see \ldblquote Elements\par
of Quaternions,\rdblquote  page 112.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash Twice as many polygons may be constructed on AB similar to a\par
given polygon CDEF G as that figure has sides.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash If the figure ABHIJ be applied to CDEF G so that the point A\par
will coincide with C, and that the line AB may be placed along CD, then the\par
points H, I, J will be respectively on the lines CE, CF, CG; also the sides BH,\par
HI, IJ of the one polygon will be respectively parallel to their homologous sides\par
DE, EF, F G of the other.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash If lines drawn from any point O in the plane of a figure to all\par
its angular points be divided in the same ratio, the lines joining the points of\par
division will form a new figure similar to, and having every side parallel to, the\par
homologous side of the original.\par
PROP. XIX.\emdash Theorem.\par
Similar triangles (ABC, DEF) have their areas to one another in the\par
duplicate ratio of their homologous sides.\par
Dem.\emdash Take BG a third proportional to BC, EF [xi.]. Join AG.\par
Then because the triangles ABC,\par
DEF are similar, AB : BC :: DE :\par
EF; hence (alternately) AB : DE ::\par
BC : EF; but BC : EF :: EF : BG\par
(const.); therefore [V. xi.] AB :\par
DE :: EF : BG; hence the sides of\par
the triangles ABG, DEF about the\par
equal angles B, E are reciprocally proportional; therefore the triangles are equal.\par
150\par
Again, since the lines BC, EF, BG are continual proportionals, BC : BG in the\par
duplicate ratio of BC : EF [V. Def. x.]; but BC : BG :: triangle ABC : ABG.\par
Therefore ABC : ABG in the duplicate ratio of BC : EF; but it has been\par
proved that the triangle ABG is equal to DEF. Therefore the triangle ABC is\par
to the triangle DEF in the duplicate ratio of BC : EF.\par
This is the first Proposition in Euclid in which the technical term \ldblquote duplicate\par
ratio\rdblquote  occurs. My experience with pupils is, that they find it very difficult to\par
understand either Euclid\rquote s proof or his definition. On this account I submit the\par
following alternative proof, which, however, makes use of a new definition of the\par
duplicate ratio of two lines, viz. the ratio of the squares (see Annotations on\par
V. Def. x.) described on these lines.\par
On AB and DE describe squares, and through C and F draw lines parallel\par
to AB and DE, and complete the rectangles AI, DN.\par
Now, the triangles JAC, ODF are evidently equiangular.\par
Hence JA : AC :: OD : DF [iv.];\par
but AC : AB :: DF : DE [iv.].\par
Hence JA : AB :: OD : DE (ex \f0\'e6quali);\par
but AB = AG, and DE = DL;\par
therefore JA : AG :: OD : DL.\par
Again, JA : AG :: AI : square AH [i.],\par
and OD : DL :: DN : square DM [i.].\par
Hence AI : AH :: DN : DM;\par
therefore AI : DN :: AH : DM [V. xvi.];\par
hence 4ABC : 4DEF :: AB2\par
: DE2\par
.\par
151\par
Exercises.\par
1. If one of two similar triangles has its sides 50 per cent. longer than the homologous\par
sides of the other; what is the ratio of their areas?\par
2. When the inscribed and circumscribed regular polygons of any common number of sides\par
to a circle have more than four sides, the difference of their areas is less than the square of\par
the side of the inscribed polygon.\par
PROP. XX.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
Similar polygons may be divided (1) into the same number of similar triangles; (2) the corresponding triangles have the same ratio to one another which\par
the polygons have; (3) the polygons are to each other in the duplicate ratio of\par
their homologous sides.\par
Dem.\emdash Let ABHIJ, CDEF G be the polygons, and let the sides AB, CD\par
be homologous. Join AH, AI, CE, CF.\par
1. The triangles into which the polygons are divided are similar. For, since\par
the polygons are similar, they are equiangular, and have the sides about their\par
equal angles proportional [Def. i.]; hence the angle B is equal to D, and AB :\par
BH :: CD : DE; therefore [vi.] the triangle ABH is equiangular to CDE;\par
hence the angle BHA is equal to DEC; but BHI is equal to DEF (hyp.);\par
therefore the angle AHI is equal to CEF. Again, because the polygons are\par
similar, IH : HB :: F E : ED; and since the triangles ABH, CDE are similar,\par
HB : HA :: ED : EC; hence (ex aequali) IH : HA :: F E : EC, and the angle\par
IHA has been proved to be equal to the angle F EC; therefore the triangles\par
IHA, F EC are equiangular. In the same manner it can be proved that the\par
remaining triangles are equiangular.\par
2. Since the triangle ABH is similar to CDE, we have [xix.].\par
ABH : CDE in the duplicate ratio of AH : CE.\par
In like manner,\par
AHI : CEF in the duplicate ratio of AH : CE;\par
hence ABH : CDE = AHI : CEF [V. xi.].\par
Similarly, AHI : CEF = AIJ : CF G.\par
152\par
In these equal ratios, the triangles ABH, AHI, AIJ are the antecedents, and\par
the triangles CDE, CEF, CF G the consequents, and [V. xii.] any one of these\par
equal ratios is equal to the ratio of the sum of all the antecedents to the sum\par
of all the consequents; therefore the triangle ABH : the triangle CDE :: the\par
polygon ABHIJ : the polygon CDEF G.\par
3. The triangle ABH : CDE in the duplicate ratio of AB : CD [xix.].\par
Hence (2) the polygon ABHIJ : the polygon CDEF G in the duplicate ratio of\par
AB : CD.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The perimeters of similar polygons are to one another in the ratio\par
of their homologous sides.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash As squares are similar polygons, therefore the duplicate ratio of\par
two lines is equal to the ratio of the squares described on them (compare Annotations, V. Def. x.).\par
Cor. 3.\emdash Similar portions of similar figures bear the same ratio to each other\par
as the wholes of the figures.\par
Cor. 4.\emdash Similar portions of the perimeters of similar figures are to each\par
other in the ratio of the whole perimeters.\par
Exercises.\par
Def. i.\emdash Homologous points in the planes of two similar figures are such, that\par
lines drawn from them to the angular points of the two figures are proportional\par
to the homologous sides of the two figures.\par
1. If two figures be similar, to each\par
point in the plane of one there will be a\par
corresponding point in the plane of the\par
other.\par
Dem.\emdash Let ABCD, A0B0C0D0 be\par
the two figures, P a point in the plane\par
of ABCD. Join AP, BP, and construct a triangle A0P\par
0B0 on A0B0\par
, similar to AP B; then it is easy to see that\par
lines from P\par
0\par
to the angular points of\par
A0B0C0D0 are proportional to the lines\par
from P to the angular points of ABCD.\par
2. If two figures be directly similar, and\par
in the same plane, there is in the plane a special point which, regarded as belonging to either figure, is its own homologous point with\par
respect to the other. For, let AB, A0B0 be\par
two homologous sides of the figures, C their\par
point of intersection. Through the two triads\par
of points A, A0\par
, C; B, B0\par
, C describe two circles intersecting again in the point O: O will\par
be the point required. For it is evident that\par
the triangles OAB, OA0B0 are similar and\par
that either may be turned round the point\par
O, so that the two bases, AB, A0B0\par
, will be parallel.\par
Def. ii.\emdash The point O is called the centre of similitude of the figures. It is\par
also called their double point.\par
3. Two regular polygons of n sides each have n centres of similitude.\par
153\par
4. If any number of similar triangles have their corresponding vertices lying on three given\par
lines, they have a common centre of similitude.\par
5. If two figures be directly similar, and have a pair of homologous sides parallel, every\par
pair of homologous sides will be parallel.\par
Def. iii.\emdash Two figures, such as those in 5, are said to be homothetic.\par
6. If two figures be homothetic, the lines joining corresponding angular points are concurrent, and the point of concurrence is the centre of similitude of the figures.\par
7. If two polygons be directly similar, either may be turned round their centre of similitude\par
until they become homothetic, and this may be done in two different ways.\par
8. Two circles are similar figures.\par
Dem.\emdash Let O, O0 be\par
their centres; let the angle\par
AOB be indefinitely small,\par
so that the arc AB may\par
be regarded as a right line;\par
make the angle A0O0B0\par
equal to AOB; then the triangles AOB, A0O0B0 are\par
similar.\par
Again, make the angle BOC indefinitely small,\par
and make B0O0C0 equal to\par
it; the triangles BOC, B0O0C0 are similar. Proceeding in this way, we see that the circles can\par
be divided into the same number of similar elementary triangles. Hence the circles are similar\par
figures.\par
9. Sectors of circles having equal central angles are similar figures.\par
10. As any two points of two circles may be regarded as homologous, two circles have\par
in consequence an infinite number of centres of similitude; their locus is the circle, whose\par
diameter is the line joining the two points for which the two circles are homothetic.\par
11. The areas of circles are to one another as the squares of their diameters. For they are\par
to one another as the similar elementary triangles into which they are divided, and these are\par
as the squares of the radii.\par
12. The circumferences of circles are as their diameters (Cor. 1).\par
13. The circumference of sectors having equal central angles are proportional to their radii.\par
Hence if a, a\par
0 denote the arcs of two sectors, which subtend equal angles at the centres, and\par
if r, r\par
0 be their radii,\par
a\par
r\par
=\par
a\par
0\par
r\par
0\par
.\par
14. The area of a circle is equal to half the rectangle contained by the circumference and\par
the radius. This is evident by dividing the circle into elementary triangles, as in Ex. 8.\par
15. The area of a sector of a circle is equal to half the rectangle contained by the arc of\par
the sector and the radius of the circle.\par
PROP. XXI.\emdash Theorem.\par
Rectilineal figures (A, B), which are similar to the same figure (C), are\par
similar to one another.\par
Dem.\emdash Since the figures A and C are similar, they are equiangular, and\par
have the sides about their equal angles proportional. In like manner B and\par
C are equiangular, and have the sides about their equal angles proportional.\par
Hence A and B are equiangular, and have the sides about their equal angles\par
proportional. Therefore they are similar.\par
154\par
Cor.\emdash Two similar rectilineal figures which are homothetic to a third are\par
homothetic to one another.\par
Exercise.\par
If three similar rectilineal figures be homothetic, two by two, their three centres of similitudes are collinear.\par
PROP. XXII\emdash Theorem.\par
If four lines (AB, CD, EF, GH) be proportional, and any pair of similar\par
rectilineal figures (ABK, CDL) be similarly described on the first and second,\par
and also any pair (EI, GJ) on the third and fourth, these figures are proportional. Conversely, if any rectilineal figure described on the first of four right\par
lines: the similar and similarly described figure described on the second :: any\par
rectilineal figure on the third : the similar and similarly described figure on the\par
fourth, the four lines are proportional.\par
Dem. 1.\emdash ABK : CDL :: AB2\par
: CD2\par
. [xx.];\par
and EI : GJ :: EF2\par
: GH2\par
[xx.].\par
But since AB : CD :: EF : GH,\par
AB2\par
: CD2\par
:: EF2\par
: GH2\par
[V. xxii., Cor. 1];\par
therefore ABK : CDL :: EI : GJ.\par
If ABK : CDL :: EI : GJ, AB : CD :: EF : GH.\par
Dem. 2.\emdash ABK : CDL :: AB2\par
: CD2\par
[xx.],\par
and EI : GJ :: EF2\par
: GH2\par
[xx.];\par
therefore AB2\par
: CD2\par
:: EF2\par
: GH2\par
.\par
Hence AB : CD :: EF : GH.\par
155\par
The enunciation of this Proposition is wrongly stated in Simson\rquote s Euclid,\par
and in those that copy it. As given in those works, the four figures should be\par
similar.\par
PROP. XXIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
Equiangular parallelograms (AD, CG) are to each other as the rectangles\par
contained by their sides about a pair of equal angles.\par
Dem.\emdash Let the two sides AB, BC about the\par
equal angles ABD, CBG, be placed so as to form\par
one right line; then it is evident, as in Prop. xiv.,\par
that GB, BD form one right line. Complete the\par
parallelogram BF. Now, denoting the parallelograms AB, BF, CG by X, Y , Z, respectively, we\par
have\emdash\par
X : Y :: AB : BC [i.],\par
Y : Z :: BD : BG [i.].\par
Hence XY : Y Z :: AB . BD : BC . BG;\par
or X : Z :: AB . BD : BC . BG.\par
Observation.\emdash Since AB . BD : BC . BG is compounded of the two ratios AB : BC and\par
BD : BG [V. Def. of compound ratio], the enunciation is the same as if we said, \ldblquote in the ratio\par
compounded of the ratios of the sides,\rdblquote  which is Euclid\rquote s; but it is more easily understood as\par
we have put it.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Triangles which have one angle of one equal or supplemental to one angle of the other,\par
are to one another in the ratio of the rectangles of the sides about those angles.\par
2. Two quadrilaterals whose diagonals intersect at equal angles are to one another in the\par
ratio of the rectangles of the diagonals.\par
PROP. XXIV.\emdash Theorem.\par
In any parallelogram (AC), every two parallelograms (AF, F C) which are\par
about a diagonal are similar to the whole and to one another.\par
Dem.\emdash Since the parallelograms AC, AF have a common angle, they are equiangular [I. xxxiv.], and all that\par
is required to be proved is, that the sides about the equal\par
angles are proportional. Now, since the lines EF, BC are\par
parallel, the triangles AEF, ABC are equiangular; therefore [iv.] AE : EF :: AB : BC, and the other sides of the\par
parallelograms are equal to AE, EF; AB, BC: hence the\par
sides about the equal angles are proportional; therefore the\par
parallelograms AF, AC are similar. In the same manner the parallelograms AF,\par
F C are similar.\par
Cor.\emdash The parallelograms AF, F C, AC are, two by two, homothetic.\par
156\par
PROP. XXV.\emdash Problem.\par
To describe a rectilineal figure equal to a given one (A), and similar to another\par
given one (BCD).\par
Sol.\emdash On any side BC of the figure BCD describe the rectangle BE equal to\par
BCD [I. xlv.], and on CE describe the rectangle EF equal to A. Between BC,\par
CF find a mean proportional GH, and on it describe the figure GHI similar\par
to BCD [xviii.], so that BC and GH may be homologous sides. GHI is the\par
figure required.\par
Dem.\emdash The three lines BC, GH, CF are in continued proportion; therefore\par
BC : CF in the duplicate ratio of BC : GH [V. Def. x.]; and since the figures\par
BCD, GHI are similar, BCD : GHI in the duplicate ratio of BC : GH [xx.];\par
also BC : CF :: rectangle BE : rectangle EF. Hence rectangle BE : EF ::\par
figure BCD : GHI; but the rectangle BE is equal to the figure BCD; therefore\par
the rectangle EF is equal to the figure GHI; but EF is equal to A (const.).\par
Therefore the figure GHI is equal to A, and it is similar to BCD. Hence it is\par
the figure required.\par
157\par
Or thus: Describe the squares EF JK, LMNO equal to the figures BCD and A respectively [II. xiv.]; then find GH a fourth proportional to EF, LM, and BC [xii.]. On GH\par
describe the rectilineal figure GHI similar to the figure BCD [xviii.], so that BC and GH\par
may be homologous sides. GHI is the figure required.\par
Dem.\emdash Because EF : LM :: BC : GH (const.), the figure EF JK : LMNO :: BCD :\par
GHI [xxii.]; but EF JK is equal to BCD (const.); therefore LMNO is equal to GHI; but\par
LMNO is equal to A (const.). Therefore GHI is equal to A, and it is similar to BCD.\par
PROP. XXVI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two similar and similarly situated parallelograms (AEF G, ABCD) have a\par
common angle, they are about the same diagonal.\par
Dem.\emdash Draw the diagonals (see fig., Prop. xxiv.) AF, AC. Then because\par
the parallelograms AEF G, ABCD are similar figures, they can be divided into\par
the same number of similar triangles [xx.]. Hence the triangle F AG is similar\par
to CAD, and therefore the angle F AG is equal to the angle CAD. Hence the\par
line AC must pass through the point F, and therefore the parallelograms are\par
about the same diagonal.\par
Observation.\emdash Proposition xxvi., being the converse of xxiv., has evidently been misplaced. The following would be a simpler enunciation:\emdash\ldblquote If two homothetic parallelograms\par
have a common angle, they are about the same diagonal.\rdblquote\par
PROP. XXVII\emdash Problem.\par
To inscribe in a given triangle (ABC) the maximum parallelogram having a\par
common angle (B) with the triangle.\par
Sol.\emdash Bisect the side AC opposite to the angle B, at P : through P draw\par
P E, P F parallel to the other sides of the triangle. BP is the parallelogram\par
required.\par
Dem.\emdash Take any other point D in AC :\par
draw DG, DH parallel to the sides, and CK\par
parallel to AB; produce EP, GD to meet CK\par
in K and J, and produce HD to meet PK\par
in I.\par
Now, since AC is bisected in P, EK is\par
also bisected in P; hence [I. xxxvi.] the parallelogram EO is equal to OK; therefore EO\par
is greater than DK; but DK is equal to F D [I. xliii.]; hence EO is greater\par
than F D. To each add BO, and we have the parallelogram BP greater than\par
BD. Hence BP is the maximum parallelogram which can be inscribed in the\par
given triangle.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The maximum parallelogram exceeds any other parallelogram about the same angle in the triangle, by the area of the similar parallelogram\par
whose diagonal is the line between the middle point P of the opposite side and\par
the point D, which is the corner of the other inscribed parallelogram.\par
158\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The parallelograms inscribed in a triangle, and having one angle\par
common with it, are proportional to the rectangles contained by the segments\par
of the sides of the triangle, made by the opposite corners of the parallelograms.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash The parallelogram AC : GH :: AC2\par
: AD . DC.\par
PROP. XXVIII.\emdash Problem.\par
To inscribe in a given triangle (ABC) a parallelogram equal to a given rectilineal figure (X) not greater than the maximum inscribed parallelogram, and\par
having an angle (B) common with the triangle.\par
Sol.\emdash Bisect the side AC opposite to B, at P. Draw P F, P E parallel to the\par
sides AB, BC; then [xxvii.] BP is the maximum parallelogram that can be\par
inscribed in the triangle ABC; and if X be equal to it, the problem is solved. If\par
not, produce EP, and draw CJ parallel to P F; then describe the parallelogram\par
KLMN [xxv.] equal to the difference between the figure P JCF and X, and\par
similar to P JCF, and so that the sides P J and KL will be homologous; then\par
cut off P I equal to KL; draw IH parallel to AB, cutting AC in D, and draw\par
DG parallel to BC. BD is the parallelogram required.\par
Dem.\emdash Since the parallelograms P C, P D are about the same diagonal, they\par
are similar [xxiv.]; but P C is similar to KP T (const.); therefore P D is similar\par
to KN, and (const.) their homologous sides, P I and KL, are equal; hence [xx.]\par
P D is equal to KN. Now, P D is the difference between EF and GH [xxvii.\par
Cor. 1], and KN is (const.) the difference between P C and X; therefore the\par
difference between P C and X is equal to the difference between EF and GH;\par
but EF is equal to P C. Hence GH is equal to X.\par
PROP. XXIX.\emdash Problem.\par
To escribe to a given triangle (ABC) a parallelogram equal to a given rectilineal figure (X), and having an angle common with an external angle (B) of\par
the triangle.\par
159\par
Sol.\emdash The construction is the same as the last, except that, instead of making the parallelogram KN equal to the excess of the parallelogram P C over the\par
rectilineal figure X, we make it equal to their sum; and then make P I equal to\par
KL; draw IH parallel to AB, and the rest of the construction as before.\par
Dem.\emdash Now it can be proved, as in II. vi., that the parallelogram BD is\par
equal to the gnomon OHJ; that is, equal to the difference between the parallelograms P D and P C, or the difference (const.) between KN and P C; that is\par
(const.), equal to X, and BD is escribed to the triangle ABC, and has an angle\par
common with the external angle B. Hence the thing required is done.\par
Observation.\emdash The enunciations of the three foregoing Propositions have been altered, in\par
order to express them in modern technical language. Some writers recommend the student to\par
omit them\emdash we think differently. In the form we have given them they are freed from their\par
usual repulsive appearance. The constructions and demonstrations are Euclid\rquote s, but slightly\par
modified.\par
PROP. XXX.\emdash Theorem.\par
To divide a given line (AB) in \ldblquote extreme and mean ratio.\rdblquote\par
Sol.\emdash Divide AB in C, so that the rectangle AB . BC may be equal to the\par
square on AC [II. xi.] Then C is the point required.\par
Dem.\emdash Because the rectangle AB . BC is equal\par
to the square on AC, AB : AC :: AC : BC [xvii.].\par
Hence AB is cut in extreme and mean ratio in C [Def. ii.].\par
Exercises.\par
1. If the three sides of a right-angled triangle be in continued proportion, the hypotenuse\par
is divided in extreme and mean ratio by the perpendicular from the right angle on the hypotenuse.\par
2. In the same case the greater segment of the hypotenuse is equal to the least side of the\par
triangle.\par
3. The square on the diameter of the circle described about the triangle formed by the\par
points F, H, D (see fig. II. xi.), is equal to six times the square on the line F D.\par
160\par
PROP. XXXI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If any similar rectilineal figure be similarly described on the three sides of a\par
right-angled triangle (ABC), the figure on the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of\par
those described on the two other sides.\par
Dem.\emdash Draw the perpendicular CD [I. xii.]. Then because ABC is a rightangled triangle, and CD is drawn from the right angle perpendicular to the\par
hypotenuse; BD : AD in the duplicate ratio of BA : AC [viii. Cor. 4]. Again,\par
because the figures described on BA, AC are similar, they are in the duplicate\par
ratio of BA : AC [xx.]. Hence [V. xi.] BA : AD :: figure described on BA :\par
figure described on AC. In like manner, AB : BD :: figure described on AB :\par
figure described on BC. Hence [V. xxiv.] AB : sum of AD and BD :: figure\par
described on the line AB : sum of the figures described on the lines AC, BC; but\par
AB is equal to the sum of AD and BD. Therefore [V. a.] the figure described\par
on the line AB is equal to the sum of the similar figures described on the lines\par
AC and BC.\par
Or thus: Let us denote the sides by\par
a, b, c, and the figures by \f3\lang1032\'e1, \'e2, \'e3; then\par
because the figures are similar, we have\par
[xx.]\par
\'e1 : \'e3 :: a\par
2\par
: c\par
2\par
therefore \'e1\par
\'e3\par
=\par
a\par
2\par
c\par
2\par
.\par
In like manner, \'e2\par
\'e3\par
=\par
b\par
2\par
c\par
2\par
;\par
therefore \'e1 + \'e2\par
\'e3\par
=\par
a\par
2 + b\par
2\par
c\par
2\par
;\par
but a\par
2 + b\par
2 = c\par
2\par
[I. xlvii.]. Therefore \'e1 + \'e2 = \'e3; that is, the sum of the figures\par
on the sides is equal to the figure on the hypotenuse.\par
Exercise.\par
If semicircles be described on supplemental chords of a semicircle, the sum of the areas\par
of the two crescents thus formed is equal to the area of the triangle whose sides are the\par
supplemental chords and the diameter.\par
PROP. XXXII.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
If two triangles (ABC, CDE) which have two sides of one proportional to\par
two sides of the other (AB : BC :: CD : DE), and the contained angles (B, D)\par
equal, be joined at an angle (C), so as to have their homologous sides parallel,\par
the remaining sides are in the same right line.\par
161\par
Dem.\emdash Because the triangles ABC, CDE\par
have the angles B and D equal, and the sides\par
about these angles proportional, viz., AB :\par
BC :: CD : DE, they are equiangular [vi.];\par
therefore the angle BAC is equal to DCE. To\par
each add ACD, and we have the sum of the angles BAC, ACD equal to the sum of DCE and\par
ACD; but the sum of BAC, ACD is [I. xxix.] two right angles; therefore the\par
sum of DCE and ACD is two right angles. Hence [I. xiv.] AC, CE are in the\par
same right line.\par
PROP. XXXIII.\endash Theorem.\par
In equal circles, angles (BOC, EP F) at the centres or (BAC, EDF) at the\par
circumferences have the same ratio to one another as the arcs (BC, EF) on\par
which they stand, and so also have the sectors (BOC, EP F).\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Take any number of arcs CG, GH in the first circle, each equal\par
to BC. Join OG, OH, and in the second circle take any number of arcs F I,\par
IJ, each equal to EF. Join IP, JP. Then because the arcs BC, CG, GH are\par
all equal, the angles BOC, COG, GOH, are all equal [III. xxvii.]. Therefore\par
the arc BH and the angle BOH are equimultiples of the arc BC and the angle\par
BOC. In like manner it may be proved that the arc EJ and the angle EP J are\par
equimultiples of the arc EF and the angle EP F. Again, since the circles are\par
equal, it is evident that the angle BOH is greater than, equal to, or less than\par
the angle EP J, according as the arc BH is greater than, equal to, or less than\par
the arc EJ. Now we have four magnitudes, namely, the arc BC, the arc EF,\par
the angle BOC, and the angle EP F; and we have taken equimultiples of the\par
first and third, namely, the arc BH, the angle BOH, and other equimultiples\par
of the second and fourth, namely, the arc EJ and the angle EP J, and we have\par
proved that, according as the multiple of the first is greater than, equal to, or\par
less than the multiple of the second, the multiple of the third is greater than,\par
equal to, or less than the multiple of the fourth. Hence [V. Def. v.] BC : EF ::\par
the angle BOC : EP F.\par
162\par
Again, since the angle BAC is half the angle BOC [III. xx.], and EDF is\par
half the angle EP F,\par
BAC : EDF :: BOC : EP F [V. xv.];\par
but BOC : EP F :: BC : EF.\par
Hence BAC : EDF :: BC : EF [V. xi.].\par
2. The sector BOC : sector EP F :: BC : EF.\par
Dem.\emdash The same construction being made, since the arc BC is equal to CG,\par
the angle BOC is equal to COG. Hence the sectors BOC, COG are congruent\par
(see Observation, Proposition xxix., Book III.); therefore they are equal. In\par
like manner the sectors COG, GOH are equal. Hence there are as many equal\par
sectors as there are equal arcs; therefore the arc BH and the sector BOH are\par
equimultiples of the arc BC and the sector BOC. In the same manner it may\par
be proved that the arc EJ and the sector EP J are equimultiples of the arc EF\par
and the sector EP F; and it is evident, by superposition, that if the arc BH is\par
greater than, equal to, or less than the arc EJ, the sector BOH is greater than,\par
equal to, or less than the sector EP J. Hence [V. Def. v.] the arc BC : EF ::\par
sector BOC : sector EP F.\par
The second part may be proved as follows:\emdash\par
Sector BOC = 1\par
2\par
rectangle contained by the arc BC, and the radius of the circle ABC\par
[xx. Ex. 14] and sector EP F = 1\par
2\par
rectangle contained by the arc EF and the radius of the\par
circle EDF; and since the circles are equal, their radii are equal. Hence, sector BOC : sector\par
EP F :: arc BC : arc EF.\par
Questions for Examination on Book VI.\par
1. What is the subject-matter of Book VI.? Ans. Application of the theory of proportion.\par
2. What are similar rectilineal figures?\par
3. What do similar figures agree in?\par
4. How many conditions are necessary to define similar triangles?\par
5. How many to define similar rectilineal figures of more than three sides?\par
6. When is a figure said to be given in species?\par
7. When in magnitude?\par
8. When in position?\par
9. What is a mean proportional between two lines?\par
10. Define two mean proportionals.\par
11. What is the altitude of a rectilineal figure?\par
12. If two triangles have equal altitudes, how do their areas vary?\par
13. How do these areas vary if they have equal bases but unequal altitudes?\par
14. If both bases and altitudes differ, how do the areas vary?\par
15. When are two lines divided proportionally?\par
16. If in two lines divided proportionally a pair of homologous points coincide with their\par
point of intersection, what property holds for the lines joining the other pairs of homologous\par
points?\par
17. Define reciprocal proportion.\par
18. If two triangles have equal areas, prove that their perpendiculars are reciprocally\par
proportional to the bases.\par
19. What is meant by figures inversely similar?\par
20. If two figures be inversely similar, how can they be changed into figures directly\par
similar?\par
163\par
21. Give an example of two triangles inversely similar. Ans. If two lines passing through\par
any point O outside a circle intersect it in pairs of points A, A0\par
; B, B0\par
, respectively, the\par
triangles OAB, OA0B0\par
, are inversely similar.\par
22. What point is it round which a figure can be turned so as to bring its sides into positions\par
of parallelism with the sides of a similar rectilineal figure. Ans. The centre of similitude of\par
the two figures.\par
23. How many figures similar to a given rectilineal figure of sides can be described on a\par
given line?\par
24. How many centres of similitude can two regular polygons of n sides each have? Ans.\par
n centres, which lie on a circle.\par
25. What are homothetic figures?\par
26. How do the areas of similar rectilineal figures vary?\par
27. What proposition is xix. a special case of?\par
28. Define Philo\rquote s line.\par
29. How many centres of similitude have two circles?\par
Exercises on Book VI.\par
1. If in a fixed triangle we draw a variable parallel to the base, the locus of the points\par
of intersection of the diagonals of the trapezium thus cut off from the triangle is the median\par
that bisects the base.\par
2. Find the locus of the point which divides in a given ratio the several lines drawn from\par
a given point to the circumference of a given circle.\par
3. Two lines AB, XY , are given in position: AB is divided in C in the ratio m : n, and\par
parallels AA0\par
, BB0\par
, CC0\par
, are drawn in any direction meeting XY in the points A0\par
, B0\par
, C0\par
;\par
prove\par
(m + n)CC0 = nAA0 + mBB0\par
.\par
4. Three concurrent lines from the vertices of a triangle ABC meet the opposite sides in\par
A0\par
, B0\par
, C0\par
; prove\par
AB0\par
. BC0\par
. CA0 = A\par
0B . B0C . C0A.\par
5. If a transversal meet the sides of a triangle ABC in the points A0\par
, B0\par
, C0\par
; prove\par
AB0\par
. BC0\par
. CA0 = \f2\u8722?\f0 A\par
0B . B0C . C0A.\par
6. If on a variable line AC, drawn from a fixed point A to any point B in the circumference\par
of a given circle, a point C be taken such that the rectangle AB . AC is constant, the locus of\par
C is a circle.\par
7. If D be the middle point of the base BC of a triangle ABC, E the foot of the perpendicular, L the point where the bisector of the angle A meets BC, H the point of contact of\par
the inscribed circle with BC; prove DE . HL = HE . HD.\par
8. In the same case, if K be the point of contact with BC of the escribed circle, which\par
touches the other sides produced, LH . BK = BD . LE.\par
9. If R, r, r\par
0\par
, r\par
00\par
, r\par
000 be the radii of the circumscribed, the inscribed, and the escribed\par
circles of a plane triangle, d, d\par
0\par
, d\par
00\par
, d\par
000 the distances of the centre of the circumscribed circle\par
from the centres of the others, then R2 = d\par
2 + 2Rr = d\par
02 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 2Rr0\par
, &c.\par
10. In the same case, 12R2 = d\par
2 + d\par
02 + d\par
002 + d\par
0002\par
.\par
11. If p\par
0\par
, p\par
00\par
, p\par
000 denote the perpendiculars of a triangle, then\par
(1) 1\par
p\par
0\par
+\par
1\par
p\par
00\par
+\par
1\par
p\par
000\par
=\par
1\par
r\par
;\par
(2) 1\par
p\par
00\par
+\par
1\par
p\par
000\par
\f2\u8722?\f0\par
1\par
p\par
0\par
=\par
1\par
r\par
0\par
, &c.;\par
(3) 2\par
p\par
0\par
=\par
1\par
r\par
\f2\u8722?\f0\par
1\par
r\par
0\par
, &c.;\par
(4) 2\par
p\par
0\par
=\par
1\par
r\par
00\par
+\par
1\par
r\par
000\par
, &c.\par
164\par
12. In a given triangle inscribe another of given form, and having one of its angles at a\par
given point in one of the sides of the original triangle.\par
13. If a triangle of given form move so that its three sides pass through three fixed points,\par
the locus of any point in its plane is a circle.\par
14. The angle A and the area of a triangle ABC are given in magnitude: if the point A\par
be fixed in position, and the point B move along a fixed line or circle, the locus of the point\par
C is a circle.\par
15. One of the vertices of a triangle of given form remains fixed; the locus of another is a\par
right line or circle; find the locus of the third.\par
16. Find the area of a triangle\f1\emdash (1) in terms of its medians; (2) in terms of its perpendiculars.\par
17. If two circles touch externally, their common tangent is a mean proportional between\par
their diameters.\par
18. If there be given three parallel lines, and two fixed points A, B; then if the lines of\par
connexion of A and B to any variable point in one of the parallels intersect the other parallels\par
in the points C and D, E and F, respectively, CF and DE pass each through a fixed point.\par
19. If a system of circles pass through two fixed points, any two secants passing through\par
one of the points are cut proportionally by the circles.\par
20. Find a point O in the plane of a triangle ABC, such that the diameters of the three\par
circles, about the triangles OAB, OBC, OCA, may be in the ratios of three given lines.\par
21. ABCD is a cyclic quadrilateral: the lines AB, AD, and the point C, are given in\par
position; find the locus of the point which divides BD in a given ratio.\par
22. CA, CB are two tangents to a circle; BE is perpendicular to AD, the diameter through\par
A; prove that CD bisects BE.\par
23. If three lines from the vertices of a triangle ABC to any interior point O meet the\par
opposite sides in the points A0\par
, B0\par
, C0\par
; prove\par
OA0\par
AA0\par
+\par
OB0\par
BB0\par
+\par
OC0\par
CC0\par
= 1.\par
24. If three concurrent lines OA, OB, OC be cut by two transversals in the two systems\par
of points A, B, C; A0\par
, B0\par
, C0\par
, respectively: prove\par
AB\par
A0B0\par
.\par
OC\par
OC0\par
=\par
BC\par
B0C0\par
.\par
OA\par
OA0\par
=\par
CA\par
C0A0\par
c\par
OB\par
OB0\par
.\par
25. The line joining the middle points of the diagonals of a quadrilateral circumscribed to\par
a circle\emdash\par
(1) divides each pair of opposite sides into inversely proportional segments;\par
(2) is divided by each pair of opposite lines into segments which, measured from the\par
centre, are proportional to the sides;\par
(3) is divided by both pairs of opposite sides into segments which, measured from\par
either diagonal, have the same ratio to each other.\par
26. If CD, CD0 be the internal and external bisectors of the angle C of the triangle ACB,\par
the three rectangles AD . DB, AC . CB, AD . BD0 are proportional to the squares of AD, AC,\par
AD0\par
; and are\emdash (1) in arithmetical progression if the difference of the base angles be equal to\par
a right angle; (2) in geometrical progression if one base angle be right; (3) in harmonical\par
progression if the sum of the base angles be equal to a right angle.\par
27. If a variable circle touch two fixed circles, the chord of contact passes through a fixed\par
point on the line connecting the centres of the fixed circles.\par
165\par
Dem.\emdash Let O, O0 be the centres of the two fixed circles; O00 the centre of the variable\par
circle; A, B the points of contact. Let AB and OO0 meet in C, and cut the fixed circles again\par
in the points A0\par
, B0\par
respectively. Join A0O, AO, BO0\par
. Then AO, BO0 meet in O00 [III. xi.].\par
Now, because the triangles OAA0\par
, O00AB are isosceles, the angle O00BA = O00AB = OA0A.\par
Hence OA0\par
is parallel to O0B; therefore OC : O0C :: OA0\par
: O0B; that is, in a given ratio.\par
Hence C is a given point.\par
28. If DD0 be the common tangent to the two circles, DD02 = AB0\par
. A0B.\par
29. If R denote the radius of O00 and \f3\lang1032\'f1, \'f1\par
0\par
, the radii of O, O0\par
, DD02\par
: AB2\par
:: (R\f0\lang1033\'b1\f3\lang1032\'f1)(R\f0\lang1033\'b1\f3\lang1032\'f1\par
0\par
) :\par
R2\par
, the choice of sign depending on the nature of the contacts. This follows from 28.\par
30. If four circles be tangential to a fifth, and if we denote by 12 the common tangent to\par
the first and second, &c., then\par
12 . 34 + 23 . 14 = 13 . 24.\par
31. The inscribed and escribed circles of any triangle are all touched by its nine-points\par
circle.\par
32. The four triangles which are determined by four points, taken three by three, are such\par
that their nine-points circles have one common point.\par
33. If a, b, c, d denote the four sides, and D, D0\par
the diagonals of a quadrilateral; prove\par
that the sides of the triangle, formed by joining the feet of the perpendiculars from any of\par
its angular points on the sides of the triangle formed by the three remaining points, are\par
proportional to the three rectangles ac, bd, DD0\par
.\par
34. Prove the converse of Ptolemy\f1\rquote\f3 s theorem (see xvii., Ex. 13).\par
35. Describe a circle which shall\f1\emdash (1) pass through a given point, and touch two given\par
circles; (2) touch three given circles.\par
36. If a variable circle touch two fixed circles, the tangent to it from their centre of\par
similitude, through which the chord of contact passes (27), is of constant length.\par
37. If the lines AD, BD0\par
(see fig., Ex. 27) be produced, they meet in a point on the\par
circumference of O00, and the line O00P is perpendicular to DD0\par
.\par
38. If A, B be two fixed points on two lines given in position, and A0\par
, B0\par
two variable\par
points, such that the ratio AA0\par
: BB0\par
is constant, the locus of the point dividing A0B0\par
in a\par
given ratio is a right line.\par
39. If a line EF divide proportionally two opposite sides of a quadrilateral, and a line\par
GH the other sides, each of these is divided by the other in the same ratio as the sides which\par
determine them.\par
40. In a given circle inscribe a triangle, such that the triangle whose angular points are the\par
feet of the perpendiculars from the extremities of the base on the bisector of the vertical angle,\par
and the foot of the perpendicular from the vertical angle on the base, may be a maximum.\par
41. In a circle, the point of intersection of the diagonals of any inscribed quadrilateral\par
coincides with the point of intersection of the diagonals of the circumscribed quadrilateral,\par
whose sides touch the circle at the angular points of the inscribed quadrilateral.\par
42. Through two given points describe a circle whose common chord with another given\par
circle may be parallel to a given line, or pass through a given point.\par
43. Being given the centre of a circle, describe it so as to cut the legs of a given angle\par
along a chord parallel to a given line.\par
166\par
44. If concurrent lines drawn from the angles of a polygon of an odd number of sides\par
divide the opposite sides each into two segments, the product of one set of alternate segments\par
is equal to the product of the other set.\par
45. If a triangle be described about a circle, the lines from the points of contact of its\par
sides with the circle to the opposite angular points are concurrent.\par
46. If a triangle be inscribed in a circle, the tangents to the circle at its three angular\par
points meet the three opposite sides at three collinear points.\par
47. The external bisectors of the angles of a triangle meet the opposite sides in three\par
collinear points.\par
48. Describe a circle touching a given line at a given point, and cutting a given circle at\par
a given angle.\par
Def.\emdash The centre of mean position of any number of points A, B, C, D, &c., is a point\par
which may be found as follows:\emdash Bisect the line joining any two points A, B, in G. Join G\par
to a third point C; divide GC in H, so that GH = 1\par
3 GC. Join H to a fourth point D, and\par
divide HD in K, so that HK = 1\par
4 HD, and so on. The last point found will be the centre of\par
mean position of the given points.\par
49. The centre of mean position of the angular points of a regular polygon is the centre\par
of figure of the polygon.\par
50. The sum of the perpendiculars let fall from any system of points A, B, C, D, &c.,\par
whose number is n on any line L, is equal to n times the perpendicular from the centre of\par
mean position on L.\par
51. The sum of the squares of lines drawn from any system of points A, B, C, D, &c., to\par
any point P, exceeds the sum of the squares of lines from the same points to their centre of\par
mean position, O, by nOP2\par
.\par
52. If a point be taken within a triangle, so as to be the centre of mean position of the\par
feet of the perpendiculars drawn from it to the sides of the triangle, the sum of the squares\par
of the perpendiculars is a minimum.\par
53. Construct a quadrilateral, being given two opposite angles, the diagonals, and the\par
angle between the diagonals.\par
54. A circle rolls inside another of double its diameter; find the locus of a fixed point in\par
its circumference.\par
55. Two points, C, D, in the circumference of a given circle are on the same side of a\par
given diameter; find a point P in the circumference at the other side of the given diameter,\par
AB, such that P C, P D may cut AB at equal distances from the centre.\par
56. If the sides of any polygon be cut by a transversal, the product of one set of alternate\par
segments is equal to the product of the remaining set.\par
57. A transversal being drawn cutting the sides of a triangle, the lines from the angles\par
of the triangle to the middle points of the segments of the transversal intercepted by those\par
angles meet the opposite sides in collinear points.\par
58. If lines be drawn from any point P to the angles of a triangle, the perpendiculars at\par
P to these lines meet the opposite sides of the triangle in three collinear points.\par
59. Divide a given semicircle into two parts by a perpendicular to the diameter, so that\par
the radii of the circles inscribed in them may have a given ratio.\par
60. From a point within a triangle perpendiculars are let fall on the sides; find the locus\par
of the point, when the sum of the squares of the lines joining the feet of the perpendiculars is\par
given.\par
61. If a circle make given intercepts on two fixed lines, the rectangle contained by the\par
perpendiculars from its centre on the bisectors of the angle formed by the lines is given.\par
62. If the base and the difference of the base angles of a triangle be given, the rectangle\par
contained by the perpendiculars from the vertex on two lines through the middle point of the\par
base, parallel to the internal and external bisectors of the vertical angle, is constant.\par
63. The rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from the extremities of the base of\par
a triangle, on the internal bisector of the vertical angle, is equal to the rectangle contained\par
by the external bisector and the perpendicular from the middle of the base on the internal\par
bisector.\par
64. State and prove the corresponding theorem for perpendiculars on the external bisector.\par
167\par
65. If R, R0 denote the radii of the circles inscribed in the triangles into which a rightangled triangle is divided by the perpendicular from the right angle on the hypotenuse; then,\par
if c be the hypotenuse, and s the semiperimeter, R2 + R02 = (s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c)\par
2\par
.\par
66. If A, B, C, D be four collinear points, find a point O in the same line with them such\par
that OA . OD = OB . OC.\par
67. The four sides of a cyclic quadrilateral are given; construct it.\par
68. Being given two circles, find the locus of a point such that tangents from it to the\par
circles may have a given ratio.\par
69. If four points A, B, C, D be collinear, find the locus of the point P at which AB and\par
CD subtend equal angles.\par
70. If a circle touch internally two sides, CA, CB, of a triangle and its circumscribed\par
circle, the distance from C to the point of contact on either side is a fourth proportional to\par
the semiperimeter, and CA, CB.\par
71. State and prove the corresponding theorem for a circle touching the circumscribed\par
circle externally and two sides produced.\par
72. Pascal\f1\rquote\f0 s Theorem.\f1\emdash If the opposite\par
sides of an irregular hexagon ABCDEF inscribed in a circle be produced till they meet,\par
the three points of intersection G, H, I are\par
collinear.\par
Dem.\emdash Join AD. Describe a circle\par
about the triangle ADI, cutting the lines\par
AF, CD produced, if necessary, in K and\par
L. Join IK, KL, LI. Now, the angles KLG,\par
F CG are each [III. xxi.] equal to the angle GAD. Hence they are equal. Therefore\par
KL is parallel to CF. Similarly, LI is parallel to CH, and KI to F H; hence the triangles KLI, F CH are homothetic. Hence the\par
lines joining corresponding vertices are concurrent. Therefore the points I, H, G are\par
collinear.\par
73. If two sides of a triangle circumscribed to a given circle be given in position, but the third side variable, the circle\par
described about the triangle touches a fixed\par
circle.\par
74. If two sides of a triangle be given in\par
position, and if the area be given in magnitude, two points can be found, at each of\par
which the base subtends a constant angle.\par
75. If a, b, c, d denote the sides of a cyclic\par
quadrilateral, and s its semiperimeter, prove\par
its area = p\par
(s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 a)(s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 b)(s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 c)(s \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 d).\par
76. If three concurrent lines from the angles of a triangle ABC meet the opposite side in\par
the points A0\par
, B0\par
, C0\par
, and the points A0\par
, B0\par
, C0 be joined, forming a second triangle A0B0C0\par
,\par
4 ABC : 4 A\par
0B\par
0C\par
0\par
:: AB . BC . CA : 2AB0\par
. BC0\par
. CA0\par
.\par
77. In the same case the diameter of the circle circumscribed about the triangle ABC =\par
AB0\par
. BC0\par
. CA0 divided by the area of A0B0C0\par
.\par
78. If a quadrilateral be inscribed in one circle, and circumscribed to another, the square\par
of its area is equal to the product of its four sides.\par
79. If on the sides AB, AC of a triangle ABC we take two points D, E, and on their line\par
of connexion F, such that\par
BD\par
AD\par
=\par
AE\par
CE\par
=\par
DF\par
EF\par
;\par
prove the triangle BF C = 2ADE.\par
168\par
80. If through the middle points of each of the two diagonals of a quadrilateral we draw\par
a parallel to the other, the lines drawn from their points of intersection to the middle points\par
of the sides divide the quadrilateral into four equal parts.\par
81. CE, DF are perpendiculars to the diameter of a semicircle, and two circles are described touching CE, DE, and the semicircle, one internally and the other externally; the\par
rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from their centres on AB is equal to CE . DF.\par
82. If lines be drawn from any point in the circumference of a circle to the angular points\par
of any inscribed regular polygon of an odd number of sides, the sums of the alternate lines\par
are equal.\par
83. If at the extremities of a chord drawn through a given point within a given circle\par
tangents be drawn, the sum of the reciprocals of the perpendiculars from the point upon the\par
tangents is constant.\par
84. If a cyclic quadrilateral be such that three of its sides pass through three fixed collinear\par
points, the fourth side passes through a fourth fixed point, collinear with the three given ones.\par
85. If all the sides of a polygon be parallel to given lines, and if the loci of all the angles\par
but one be right lines, the locus of the remaining angle is also a right line.\par
86. If the vertical angle and the bisector of the vertical angle be given, the sum of the\par
reciprocals of the containing sides is constant.\par
87. If P, P\par
0 denote the areas of two regular polygons of any common number of sides,\par
inscribed and circumscribed to a circle, and \f3\lang1032\'d0, \'d00\par
the areas of the corresponding polygons\par
of double the number of sides; prove \'d0 is a geometric mean between P and P\par
0\par
, and \'d00 a\par
harmonic mean between \'d0 and P\par
0\par
.\par
88. The difference of the areas of the triangles formed by joining the centres of the circles\par
described about the equilateral triangles constructed\f1\emdash (1) outwards; (2) inwards\emdash on the sides\par
of any triangle, is equal to the area of that triangle.\par
89. In the same case, the sum of the squares of the sides of the two new triangles is equal\par
to the sum of the squares of the sides of the original triangle.\par
90. If R, r denote the radii of the circumscribed and inscribed circles to a regular polygon\par
of any number of sides, R0\par
, r\par
0\par
, corresponding radii to a regular polygon of the same area, and\par
double the number of sides; prove\par
R\par
0 =\par
\f2\u8730?\f0\par
Rr, and r\par
0 =\par
r\par
r(R + r)\par
2\par
.\par
91. If the altitude of a triangle be equal to its base, the sum of the distances of the\par
orthocentre from the base and from the middle point of the base is equal to half the base.\par
92. In any triangle, the radius of the circumscribed circle is to the radius of the circle\par
which is the locus of the vertex, when the base and the ratio of the sides are given, as the\par
difference of the squares of the sides is to four times the area.\par
93. Given the area of a parallelogram, one of its angles, and the difference between its\par
diagonals; construct the parallelogram.\par
94. If a variable circle touch two equal circles, one internally and the other externally,\par
and perpendiculars be let fall from its centre on the transverse tangents to these circles, the\par
rectangle of the intercepts between the feet of these perpendiculars and the intersection of the\par
tangents is constant.\par
95. Given the base of a triangle, the vertical angle, and the point in the base whose\par
distance from the vertex is equal half the sum of the sides; construct the triangle.\par
96. If the middle point of the base BC of an isosceles triangle ABC be the centre of a\par
circle touching the equal sides, prove that any variable tangent to the circle will cut the sides\par
in points D, E, such that the rectangle BD . CE will be constant.\par
97. Inscribe in a given circle a trapezium, the sum of whose opposite parallel sides is given,\par
and whose area is given.\par
98. Inscribe in a given circle a polygon all whose sides pass through given points.\par
99. If two circles X, Y be so related that a triangle may be inscribed in X and circumscribed about Y , an infinite number of such triangles can be constructed.\par
100. In the same case, the circle inscribed in the triangle formed by joining the points of\par
contact on Y touches a given circle.\par
101. And the circle described about the triangle formed by drawing tangents to X, at the\par
angular points of the inscribed triangle, touches a given circle.\par
169\par
102. Find a point, the sum of whose distances from three given points may be a minimum.\par
103. A line drawn through the intersection of two tangents to a circle is divided harmonically by the circle and the chord of contact.\par
104. To construct a quadrilateral similar to a given one whose four sides shall pass through\par
four given points.\par
105. To construct a quadrilateral, similar to a given one, whose four vertices shall lie on\par
four given lines.\par
106. Given the base of a triangle, the difference of the base angles, and the rectangle of\par
the sides; construct the triangle.\par
107. ABCD is a square, the side CD is bisected in E, and the line EF drawn, making\par
the angle AEF = EAB; prove that EF divides the side BC in the ratio of 2 : 1.\par
108. If any chord be drawn through a fixed point on a diameter of a circle, and its\par
extremities joined to either end of the diameter, the joining lines cut off, on the tangent at\par
the other end, portions whose rectangle is constant.\par
109. If two circles touch, and through their point of contact two secants be drawn at\par
right angles to each other, cutting the circles respectively in the points A, A0\par
; B, B0\par
; then\par
AA02 + BB02\par
is constant.\par
110. If two secants at right angles to each other, passing through one of the points of\par
intersection of two circles, cut the circles again, and the line through their centres in the two\par
systems of points a, b, c; a\par
0\par
, b\par
0\par
, c\par
0\par
respectively, then ab : bc :: a\par
0\par
b\par
0\par
: b\par
0\par
c\par
0\par
.\par
111. Two circles described to touch an ordinate of a semicircle, the semicircle itself, and\par
the semicircles on the segments of the diameter, are equal to one another.\par
112. If a chord of a given circle subtend a right angle at a given point, the locus of the\par
intersection of the tangents at its extremities is a circle.\par
113. The rectangle contained by the segments of the base of a triangle, made by the point\par
of contact of the inscribed circle, is equal to the rectangle contained by the perpendiculars\par
from the extremities of the base on the bisector of the vertical angle.\par
114. If O be the centre of the inscribed circle of the triangle prove\par
OA2\par
bc\par
+\par
OB2\par
ca\par
+\par
OC2\par
ab\par
= 1.\par
115. State and prove the corresponding theorems for the centres of the escribed circles.\par
116. Four points A, B, C, D are collinear; find a point P at which the segments AB, BC,\par
CD subtend equal angles.\par
117. The product of the bisectors of the three angles of a triangle whose sides are a, b, c,\par
is\par
8abc.s.area\par
(a + b)(b + c)(c + a)\par
.\par
118. In the same case the product of the alternate segments of the sides made by the\par
bisectors of the angles is\par
a\par
2\par
b\par
2\par
c\par
2\par
(a + b)(b + c)(c + a)\par
.\par
119. If three of the six points in which a circle meets the sides of any triangle be such,\par
that the lines joining them to the opposite vertices are concurrent, the same property is true\par
of the three remaining points.\par
120. If a triangle A0B0C0 be inscribed in another ABC, prove\par
AB0\par
. BC0\par
. CA0 + A\par
0B . B0C . C0A\par
is equal twice the triangle A0B0C0 multiplied by the diameter of the circle ABC.\par
121. Construct a polygon of an odd number of sides, being given that the sides taken in\par
order are divided in given ratios by fixed points.\par
122. If the external diagonal of a quadrilateral inscribed in a given circle be a chord of\par
another given circle, the locus of its middle point is a circle.\par
123. If a chord of one circle be a tangent to another, the line connecting the middle point\par
of each arc which it cuts off on the first, to its point of contact with the second, passes through\par
a given point.\par
124. From a point P in the plane of a given polygon perpendiculars are let fall on its sides;\par
if the area of the polygon formed by joining the feet of the perpendiculars be given, the locus\par
of P is a circle.\par
170\par
BOOK XI.\par
THEORY OF PLANES, COPLANAR LINES, AND SOLID\par
ANGLES\par
DEFINITIONS.\par
i. When two or more lines are in one plane they are said to be coplanar .\par
ii. The angle which one plane makes with another is called a dihedral angle.\par
iii. A solid angle is that which is made by more than two plane angles, in\par
different planes, meeting in a point.\par
iv. The point is called the vertex of the solid angle.\par
v. If a solid angle be composed of three plane angles it is called a trihedral\par
angle; if of four, a tetrahedral angle; and if of more than four, a polyhedral angle.\par
PROP. I.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
One part (AB) of a right line cannot be in a plane (X), and another part\par
(BC) not in it.\par
Dem.\emdash Since AB is in the plane X, it\par
can be produced in it [Bk. I. Post. ii.]; let\par
it be produced to D. Then, if BC be not in\par
X, let any other plane passing through AD\par
be turned round AD until it passes through\par
the point C. Now, because the points B,\par
C are in this second plane, the line BC [I., Def. vi.] is in it. Therefore the two\par
right lines ABC, ABD lying in one plane have a common segment AB, which\par
is impossible. Therefore, &c.\par
PROP. II.\emdash Theorem.\par
Two right lines (AB, CD) which intersect one\par
another in any point (E) are coplanar, and so also\par
are any three right lines (EC, CB, BE) which\par
form a triangle.\par
Dem.\emdash Let any plane pass through EB, and\par
be turned round it until it passes through C. Then\par
because the points E, C are in this plane, the right\par
line EC is in it [I., Def. vi.]. For the same reason\par
the line BC is in it. Therefore the lines EC, CB,\par
BE are coplanar; but AB and CD are two of these lines. Hence AB and CD\par
are coplanar.\par
171\par
PROP. III.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two planes (AB, BC) cut one another, their common section (BD) is a\par
right line.\par
Dem.\emdash If not from B to D, draw in the\par
plane AB the right line BED, and in the plane\par
BC the right line BF D. Then the right lines\par
BED, BF D enclose a space, which [I., Axiom x.] is impossible. Therefore the common\par
section BD of the two planes must be a right\par
line.\par
PROP. IV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a right line (EF) be perpendicular to each of two intersecting lines (AB,\par
CD), it will be perpendicular to any line GH, which is both coplanar and concurrent with them.\par
Dem.\emdash Through any point G in GH draw a line BC intersecting AB, CD,\par
and so as to be bisected in G; and join any point F in EF to B, G, C. Then,\par
because EF is perpendicular to the lines EB, EC, we have\par
BF2 = BE2 + EF2\par
, and CF2 = CE2 + EF2\par
;\par
\f2\u8756?\f1  \f0 BF2 + CF2 = BE2 + CE2 + 2EF2\par
.\par
Again BF2 + CF2 = 2BG2 + 2GF2\par
[II. x. Ex. 2],\par
and BE2 + CE2 = 2BG2 + 2GE2\par
;\par
\f2\u8756?\f1  \f0 2BG2 + 2GF2 = 2BG2 + 2GE2 + 2EF2\par
;\par
\f2\u8756?\f1  \f0 GF2 = GE2 + EF2\par
.\par
172\par
Hence the angle GEF is right, and EF is perpendicular to EG.\par
Def. vi.\f1\emdash A line such as EF, which is perpendicular to a system of concurrent and coplanar lines, is said to be perpendicular to the plane of these lines,\par
and is called a normal to it.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The normal is the least line that may be drawn from a given point\par
to a given plane; and of all others that may be drawn to it, the lines of any\par
system making equal angles with the normal are equal to each other.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash A perpendicular to each of two intersecting lines is normal to their\par
plane.\par
PROP. V.\emdash Theorem.\par
If three concurrent lines (BC, BD, BE) have a\par
common perpendicular (AB), they are coplanar.\par
Dem.\emdash For if possible let BC be not coplanar with\par
BD, BE, and let the plane of AB, BC intersect the\par
plane of BD, BE in the line BF. Then [XI. iii.] BF\par
is a right line; and, since it is coplanar with BD, BE,\par
which are each perpendicular to AB, it is [XI. iv.]\par
perpendicular to AB. Therefore the angle ABF is\par
right; and the angle ABC is right (hyp.). Hence ABC\par
is equal to ABF, which is impossible [I., Axiom ix.].\par
Therefore the lines BC, BD, BE are coplanar.\par
PROP. VI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two right lines (AB, CD) be normals to the same plane (X), they shall be\par
parallel to one another.\par
Dem.\emdash Let AB, CD meet the plane X at the points\par
B, D. Join BD, and in the plane X draw DE at right\par
angles to BD; take any point E in DE. Join BE, AE,\par
AD. Then because AB is normal to X, the angle ABE\par
is right. Therefore AE2 = AB2 +BE2 = AB2 +BD2 +\par
DE2\par
; because the angle BDE is right. But AB2 +\par
BD2 = AD2\par
, because the angle ABD is right. Hence\par
AE2 = AD2 + DE2\par
. Therefore the angle ADE is right.\par
[I. xlviii]. And since CD is normal to the plane X,\par
DE is perpendicular to CD. Hence DE is a common\par
perpendicular to the three concurrent lines CD, AD,\par
BD. Therefore these lines are coplanar [XI. v.]. But AB is coplanar with AD,\par
BD [XI. ii.]. Therefore the lines AD, BD, CD are coplanar; and since the\par
angles ABD, BDC are right, the line AB is parallel to CD [I. xxviii.].\par
Def. vii.\emdash If from every point in a given line normals be drawn to a given\par
plane, the locus of their feet is called the projection of the given line on the\par
plane.\par
173\par
Exercises.\par
1. The projection of any line on a plane is a right line.\par
2. The projection on either of two intersecting planes of a normal to the other plane is\par
perpendicular to the line of intersection of the planes.\par
PROP. VII.\emdash Theorem.\par
Two parallel lines (AB, CD) and any line (EF) intersecting them are\par
coplanar.\par
Dem.\emdash If possible let the intersecting\par
line be out of the plane, as EGF. And in\par
the plane, of the parallels draw [I. Post. ii.]\par
the right line EHF. Then we have two\par
right lines EGF, EHF, enclosing a space,\par
which [I. Axiom x.] is impossible. Hence\par
the two parallel right lines and the transversal are coplanar.\par
Or thus: Since the points E, F are in the plane of the parallels, the line joining these\par
points is in that plane [I. Def. vi].\par
PROP. VIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If one (AB) of two parallel right lines (AB, CD), be normal to a plane (X),\par
the other line (CD) shall be normal to the same plane.\par
Dem.\emdash Let AB, CD meet the plane X in the\par
points B, D. Join BD. Then the lines AB, BD,\par
CD are coplanar. Now in the plane X, to which AB\par
is normal, draw DE at right angles to BD. Take any\par
point E in DE, and join BE, AE, AD.\par
Then because AB is normal to the plane X, it\par
is perpendicular to the line BE in that plane [XI.\par
Def. vi.]. Hence the angle ABE is right; therefore\par
AE2 = AB2 + BE2 = AB2 + BD2 + DE2\par
(because\par
BDE is right (const.)) = AD2 + DE2\par
(because ABD\par
is right (hyp.)). Therefore the angle ADE is right.\par
Hence DE is at right angles both to AD and BD. Therefore [XI. iv.] DE\par
is perpendicular to CD, which is coplanar and concurrent with AD and BD.\par
Again, since AB and CD are parallel, the sum of the angles ABD, BDC is\par
two right angles [I. xxix.]; but ABD is right (hyp.); therefore BDC is right.\par
Hence CD is perpendicular to the two lines DB, DE, and therefore [XI. iv.] it\par
is normal to their plane, that is, it is normal to X.\par
174\par
PROP. IX\emdash Theorem.\par
Two right lines (AB, CD) which are each parallel to a third line (EF) are\par
parallel to one another.\par
Dem.\emdash If the three lines be coplanar, the\par
Proposition is evidently the same as I. xxx.\par
If they are not coplanar, from any point G in\par
EF draw in the planes of EF, AB; EF, CD,\par
respectively, the lines GH, GK each perpendicular to EF [I. xi.]. Then because EF is\par
perpendicular to each of the lines GH, GK, it\par
is normal to their plane [XI. iv.]. And because AB is parallel to EF (hyp.), and\par
EF is normal to the plane GHK, AB is normal to the plane GHK [XI. viii.].\par
In like manner CD is normal to the plane HGK. Hence, since AB and CD are\par
normals to the same plane, they are parallel to one another.\par
PROP. X.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two intersecting right lines (AB, BC) be respectively parallel to two other\par
intersecting right lines (DE, EF), the angle (ABC) between the former is equal\par
to the angle (DEF) between the latter.\par
Dem.\emdash If both pairs of lines be coplanar, the\par
proposition is the same as I. xxix., Ex. 2. If not,\par
take any points A, C in the lines AB, BC, and cut\par
off ED = BA, and EF = BC [I. iii.]. Join AD,\par
BE, CF, AC, DF. Then because AB is equal\par
and parallel to DE, AD is equal and parallel to\par
BE [I. xxxiii]. In like manner CF is equal and\par
parallel to BE. Hence [XI. ix.] AD is equal and\par
parallel to CF. Hence [I. xxxiii.] AC is equal to\par
DF. Therefore the triangles ABC, DEF, have\par
the three sides of one respectively equal to the three sides of the other. Hence\par
[I. viii.] the angle ABC is equal to DEF.\par
Def. viii.\emdash Two planes which meet are perpendicular to each other, when\par
the right lines drawn in one of them perpendicular to their common section are\par
normals to the other.\par
Def. ix.\emdash When two planes which meet are not perpendicular to each other,\par
their inclination is the acute angle contained by two right lines drawn from any\par
point of their common section at right angles to it\emdash one in one plane, and the\par
other in the other.\par
Observation.\emdash These definitions tacitly assume the result of Props. iii. and x. of this book.\par
On this account we have departed from the usual custom of placing them at the beginning of\par
the book. We have altered the place of Definition vi. for a similar reason.\par
175\par
PROP. XI.\emdash Problem.\par
To draw a normal to a given plane (BH) from a given point (A) not in it.\par
Sol.\emdash In the given plane BH draw any\par
line BC, and from A draw AD perpendicular to BC [I. xii.]; then if AD be perpendicular to the plane, the thing required is\par
done. If not, from D draw DE in the plane\par
BH at right angles to BC [I. xi.], and from\par
A draw AF [I. xii.] perpendicular to DE.\par
AF is normal to the plane BH.\par
Dem.\emdash Draw GH parallel to BC.\par
Then because BC is perpendicular both to ED and DA, it is normal to the\par
plane of ED, DA [XI. iv.]; and since GH is parallel to BC, it is normal to the\par
same plane [XI. viii.]. Hence AF is perpendicular to GH [XI. Def. vi.], and AF\par
is perpendicular to DE (const.). Therefore AF is normal to the plane of GH\par
and ED\emdash that is, to the plane BH.\par
PROP. XII.\emdash Problem.\par
To draw a normal to a given plane from\par
a given point (A) in the plane.\par
Sol.\emdash From any point B not in the\par
plane draw [XI. xi.] BC normal to it. If\par
this line pass through A it is the normal\par
required. If not, from A draw AD parallel\par
to BC [I. xxxi.]. Then because AD and\par
BC are parallel, and BC is normal to the\par
plane, AD is also normal to it [XI. viii.],\par
and it is drawn from the given point. Hence\par
it is the required normal.\par
PROP. XIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
From the same point (A) there can be\par
but one normal drawn to a given plane\par
(X).\par
Dem.\emdash 1. Let A be in the given plane,\par
and if possible let AB, AC be both normals\par
to it, on the same side. Now let the plane\par
of BA, AC cut the given plane X in the\par
line DE. Then because BA is a normal,\par
the angle BAE is right. In like manner CAE is right. Hence BAE = CAE,\par
which is impossible.\par
176\par
2. If the point be above the plane, there can be but one normal; for, if there\par
could be two, they would be parallel [XI. vi.] to one another, which is absurd.\par
Therefore from the same point there can be drawn but one normal to a given\par
plane.\par
PROP. XIV.\emdash Theorem.\par
Planes (CD, EF) which have a common normal (AB) are parallel to each\par
other.\par
Dem.\emdash If the planes be not parallel,\par
they will meet when produced. Let them\par
meet, their common section being the line\par
GH, in which take any point K. Join\par
AK, BK. Then because AB is normal\par
to the plane CD, it is perpendicular to\par
the line AK, which it meets in that plane\par
[XI. Def. vi.]. Therefore the angle BAK\par
is right. In like manner the angle ABK\par
is right. Hence the plane triangle ABK\par
has two right angles, which is impossible. Therefore the planes CD, EF cannot\par
meet\emdash that is, they are parallel.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The angle between two planes is equal to the angle between two intersecting normals\par
to these planes.\par
2. If a line be parallel to each of two planes, the sections which any plane passing through\par
it makes with them are parallel.\par
3. If a line be parallel to each of two intersecting planes, it is parallel to their intersection.\par
4. If two right lines be parallel, they are parallel to the common section of any two planes\par
passing through them.\par
5. If the intersections of several planes be parallel, the normals drawn to them from any\par
point are coplanar.\par
PROP. XV.\emdash Theorem.\par
Two planes (AC, DF) are parallel, if two intersecting lines (AB, BC) on\par
one of them be respectively parallel to two intersecting lines (DE, EF) on the\par
other.\par
Dem.\emdash From B draw BG perpendicular to the plane DF [XI. xi.], and let\par
it meet that plane in G. Through G draw GH parallel to ED, and GK to EF.\par
Now, since GH is parallel to ED (const.), and AB to ED (hyp.), AB is parallel\par
to GH [XI. ix.]. Hence the sum of the angles ABG, BGH is two right angles\par
[I. xxix]; but BGH is right (const.); therefore ABG is right. In like manner\par
177\par
CBG is right. Hence BG is normal to the plane AC [XI. Def. vi.], and it is\par
normal to DF (const.). Hence the planes AC, DF have a common normal BG;\par
therefore they are parallel to one another.\par
PROP. XVI.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two parallel planes (AB, CD)\par
be cut by a third plane (EF, HG),\par
their common sections (EF, GH)\par
with it are parallel.\par
Dem.\emdash If the lines EF, GH are\par
not parallel, they must meet at some\par
finite distance. Let them meet in K.\par
Now since K is a point in the line\par
EF, and EF is in the plane AB, K\par
is in the plane AB. In like manner\par
K is a point in the plane CD. Hence\par
the planes AB, CD meet in K, which\par
is impossible, since they are parallel.\par
Therefore the lines EF, GH must be\par
parallel.\par
Exercises.\par
1. Parallel planes intercept equal segments on parallel lines.\par
2. Parallel lines intersecting the same plane make equal angles with it.\par
3. A right line intersecting parallel planes makes equal angles with them.\par
PROP. XVII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two parallel lines (AB, CD) be cut by three parallel planes (GH, KL,\par
MN) in two triads of points (A, E, B; C, F, D), their segments between\par
those points are proportional.\par
178\par
Dem.\emdash Join AC, BD, AD. Let AD meet\par
the plane KL in X. Join EX, XF. Then because the parallel planes KL, MN are cut by\par
the plane ABD in the lines EX, BD, these lines\par
are parallel [XI. xvi.]. Hence\par
AE : EB :: AX : XD [VI. ii.].\par
In like manner,\par
AX : XD :: CF : F D.\par
Therefore [V. xi.]\par
AE : EB :: CF : F D.\par
PROP. XVIII.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a right line (AB) be normal to a plane (CI), any plane (DE) passing\par
through it shall be perpendicular to that plane.\par
Dem.\emdash Let CE be the common section of the planes DE, CI. From any\par
point F in CE draw F G in the plane\par
DE parallel to AB [I. xxxi.]. Then because AB and F G are parallel, but AB\par
is normal, to the plane CI; hence F G is\par
normal to it [XI. viii.]. Now since F G is\par
parallel to AB, the angles ABF, BF G\par
are equal to two right angles [I. xxix.];\par
but ABF is right (hyp.); therefore BF G is right\emdash that is, F G is perpendicular\par
to CE. Hence every line in the plane DE, drawn perpendicular to the common section of the planes DE, CI, is normal to the plane CI. Therefore [XI.\par
Def. viii.] the planes DE, CI are perpendicular to each other.\par
PROP. XIX.\emdash Theorem.\par
If two intersecting planes (AB, BC) be each\par
perpendicular to a third plane (ADC), their common section (BD) shall be normal to that plane.\par
Dem.\emdash If not, draw from D in the plane AB\par
the line DE perpendicular to AD, the common section of the planes AB, ADC; and in the plane BC\par
draw BF perpendicular to the common section DC\par
of the planes BC, ADC. Then because the plane\par
AB is perpendicular to ADC, the line DE in AB\par
179\par
is normal to the plane ADC [XI. Def. viii.]. In like\par
manner DF is normal to it. Therefore from the point D there are two distinct\par
normals to the plane ADC, which [XI. xiii.] is impossible. Hence BD must be\par
normal to the plane ADC.\par
Exercises.\par
1. If three planes have a common line of intersection, the normals drawn to these planes\par
from any point of that line are coplanar.\par
2. If two intersecting planes be respectively perpendicular to two intersecting lines, the\par
line of intersection of the former is normal to the plane of the latter.\par
3. In the last case, show that the dihedral angle between the planes is equal to the\par
rectilineal angle between the normals.\par
PROP. XX.\emdash Theorem.\par
The sum of any two plane angles (BAD, DAC) of a trihedral angle (A) is\par
greater than the third (BAC).\par
Dem.\emdash If the third angle BAC be less\par
than or equal to either of the other angles\par
the proposition is evident. If not, suppose\par
it greater: take any point D in AD, and\par
at the point A in the plane BAC make the\par
angle BAE equal BAD [I. xxiii.], and cut\par
off AE equal AD. Through E draw BC,\par
cutting AB, AC in the points B, C. Join\par
DB, DC.\par
Then the triangles BAD, BAE have the two sides BA, AD in one equal\par
respectively to the two sides BA, AE in the other, and the angle BAD equal\par
to BAE; therefore the third side BD is equal to BE. But the sum of the sides\par
BD, DC is greater than BC; hence DC is greater than EC. Again, because\par
the triangles DAC, EAC have the sides DA, AC respectively equal to the sides\par
EA, AC in the other, but the base DC greater than EC; therefore [I. xxv.] the\par
angle DAC is greater than EAC, but the angle DAB is equal to BAE (const.).\par
Hence the sum of the angles BAD, DAC is greater than the angle BAC.\par
PROP. XXI.\emdash Theorem.\par
The sum of all the plane angles (BAC,\par
CAD, &c.) forming any solid angle (A) is less\par
than four right angles.\par
Dem.\emdash Suppose for simplicity that the solid\par
angle A is contained by five plane angles BAC,\par
CAD, DAE, EAF, F AB; and let the planes of\par
these angles be cut by another plane in the lines\par
BC, CD, DE, EF, F B; then we have [XI. xx.],\par
180\par
\f2\u8736?\f0 ABC + ABF greater than F BC,\par
\f2\u8736?\f0 ACB + ACD ,, BCD, &c.\par
Hence, adding, we get the sum of the base angles of the five triangles BAC,\par
CAD, &c., greater than the sum of the interior angles of the pentagon BCDEF\par
\f1\emdash that is, greater than six right angles. But the sum of the base angles of the\par
same triangles, together with the sum of the plane angles BAC, CAD, &c.,\par
forming the solid angle A, is equal to twice as many right angles as there are\par
triangles BAC, CAD, &c.\emdash that is, equal to ten right angles. Hence the sum\par
of the angles forming the solid angle is less than four right angles.\par
Observation.\emdash This Prop. may not hold if the polygonal base BCDEF contain re-entrant\par
angles.\par
Exercises on Book XI.\par
1. Any face angle of a trihedral angle is less than the sum, but greater than the difference,\par
of the supplements of the other two face angles.\par
2. A solid angle cannot be formed of equal plane angles which are equal to the angles of\par
a regular polygon of n sides, except in the case of n = 3, 4, or 5.\par
3. Through one of two non-coplanar lines draw a plane parallel to the other.\par
4. Draw a common perpendicular to two non-coplanar lines, and show that it is the\par
shortest distance between them.\par
5. If two of the plane angles of a tetrahedral angle be equal, the planes of these angles\par
are equally inclined to the plane of the third angle, and conversely. If two of the planes of a\par
trihedral angle be equally inclined to the third plane, the angles contained in those planes are\par
equal.\par
6. The three lines of intersection of three planes are either parallel or concurrent.\par
7. If a trihedral angle O be formed by three right angles, and A, B, C be points along\par
the edges, the orthocentre of the triangle ABC is the foot of the normal from O on the plane\par
ABC.\par
8. If through the vertex O of a trihedral angle O\emdash ABC any line OD be drawn interior\par
to the angle, the sum of the rectilineal angles DOA, DOB, DOC is less than the sum, but\par
greater than half the sum, of the face angles of the trihedral.\par
9. If on the edges of a trihedral angle O\emdash ABC three equal lines OA, OB, OC be taken,\par
each of these is greater than the radius of the circle described about the triangle ABC.\par
10. Given the three angles of a trihedral angle, find, by a plane construction, the angles\par
between the containing planes.\par
11. If any plane P cut the four sides of a Gauche quadrilateral (a quadrilateral whose\par
angular points are not coplanar) ABCD in four points, a, b, c, d, then the product of the four\par
ratios\par
Aa\par
aB\par
,\par
Bb\par
bC\par
,\par
Cc\par
cD\par
,\par
Dd\par
dA\par
is plus unity, and conversely, if the product\par
Aa\par
aB\par
.\par
Bb\par
bC\par
.\par
Cc\par
cD\par
.\par
Dd\par
dA\par
= +1,\par
the points a, b, c, d are coplanar.\par
12. If in the last exercise the intersecting plane be parallel to any two sides of the quadrilateral, it cuts the two remaining sides proportionally.\par
Def. x.\emdash If at the vertex O of a trihedral angle O\emdash ABC we draw normals OA0\par
, OB0\par
,\par
OC0\par
to the faces OBC, OCA, OAB, respectively, in such a manner that OA0 will be on\par
the same side of the plane OBC as OA, &c., the trihedral angle O\emdash A0B0C0\par
is called the\par
supplementary of the trihedral angle O\emdash ABC.\par
13. If O\emdash A0B0C0 be the supplementary of O\emdash ABC, prove that O\emdash ABC is the supplementary of O\emdash A0B0C0\par
.\par
181\par
14. If two trihedral angles be supplementary, each dihedral angle of one is the supplement\par
of the corresponding face angle of the other.\par
15. Through a given point draw a right line which will meet two non-coplanar lines.\par
16. Draw a right line parallel to a given line, which will meet two non-coplanar lines.\par
17. Being given an angle AOB, the locus of all the points P of space, such that the sum\par
of the projections of the line OP on OA and OB may be constant, is a plane.\par
182\par
APPENDIX.\par
PRISM, PYRAMID, CYLINDER, SPHERE, AND CONE\par
DEFINITIONS.\par
i. A polyhedron is a solid figure contained by plane figures: if it be contained\par
by four plane figures it is called a tetrahedron; by six, a hexahedron; by eight,\par
an octahedron; by twelve, a dodecahedron; and if by twenty, an icosahedron.\par
ii. If the plane faces of a polyhedron be equal and similar rectilineal figures,\par
it is called a regular polyhedron.\par
iii. A pyramid is a polyhedron of which all the faces but one meet in a point.\par
This point is called the vertex ; and the opposite face, the base.\par
iv. A prism is a polyhedron having a pair of parallel faces which are equal\par
and similar rectilineal figures, and are called its ends. The others, called its side\par
faces, are parallelograms.\par
v. A prism whose ends are perpendicular to its sides is called a right prism;\par
any other is called an oblique prism.\par
vi. The altitude of a pyramid is the length of the perpendicular drawn from\par
its vertex to its base; and the altitude of a prism is the perpendicular distance\par
between its ends.\par
vii. A parallelopiped is a prism whose bases are parallelograms. A parallelopiped is evidently a hexahedron.\par
viii. A cube is a rectangular parallelopiped, all whose sides are squares.\par
ix. A cylinder is a solid figure formed by the revolution of a rectangle about\par
one of its sides, which remains fixed, and which is called its axis. The circles\par
which terminate a cylinder are called its bases or ends.\par
x. A cone is the solid figure described by the revolution of a right-angled\par
triangle about one of the legs, which remains fixed, and which is called the axis.\par
The other leg describes the base, which is a circle.\par
xi. A sphere is the solid described by the revolution of a semicircle about\par
a diameter, which remains fixed. The centre of the sphere is the centre of the\par
generating semicircle. Any line passing through the centre of a sphere and\par
terminated both ways by the surface is called a diameter.\par
PROP. I.\emdash Theorem.\par
Right prisms (ABCDE\endash F GHIJ, A0B0C\par
0D0E0\endash F\par
0G0H0\par
I\par
0J\par
0\par
) which have bases (ABCDE, A0B0C\par
0D0E0\par
) that are equal and similar, and which have equal\par
altitudes, are equal.\par
183\par
Dem.\emdash Apply the bases to each\par
other; then, since they are equal and\par
similar figures, they will coincide\emdash\par
that is, the point A with A0\par
, B with\par
B0\par
, &c. And since AF is equal to\par
A0F\par
0\par
, and each is normal to its respective base, the: point F will coincide with F\par
0\par
. In the same manner\par
the points G, H, I, J will coincide\par
respectively with the points G0\par
, H0\par
,\par
I\par
0\par
, J\par
0\par
. Hence the prisms are equal in\par
every respect.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash Right prisms which have equal bases (EF, E0F\par
0\par
) and equal altitudes\par
are equal in volume.\par
Dem.\emdash Since the bases are equal, but not similar, we can suppose one of\par
them, EF, divided into parts A, B, C, and re-arranged so as to make them\par
coincide with the other [I. xxxv., note]; and since the prism on E0F\par
0\par
can be\par
subdivided in the same manner by planes perpendicular to the base, the proposition is evident.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The volumes of right prisms (X, Y ) having equal bases are proportional to their altitudes.\par
For, if the altitudes be in the ratio of m : n, X can be divided into m\par
prisms of equal altitudes by planes parallel to the base; then these m prisms\par
will be all equal. In like manner, Y can be divided into n equal prisms. Hence\par
X : Y :: m : n.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash In right prisms of equal altitudes the volumes are to one another\par
as the areas of their bases. This may be proved by dividing the bases into parts\par
so that the subdivisions will be equal, and then the volumes proportional to the\par
number of subdivisions in their respective bases, that is, to their areas.\par
Cor. 4.\emdash The volume of a rectangular parallelopiped is measured by the\par
continued product of its three dimensions.\par
PROP. II.\emdash Theorem.\par
Parallelopipeds (ABCD\endash EF GH, ABCD\endash MNOP), having a common base\par
(ABCD) and equal altitudes, are equal.\par
184\par
1\par
\f4\u9702?\f0\par
. Let the edges MN, EF be in one right line; then GH, OP must be in\par
one right line. Now EF = MN, because each equal AB; therefore ME = NF;\par
therefore the prisms AEM\f1\endash DHP, and BF N\endash CGO, have their triangular bases\par
AEM, BF N identically equal, and they have equal altitudes; hence they are\par
equal; and supposing them taken away from the entire solid, the remaining\par
parallelopipeds ABCD\endash EF GH, ABCD\endash MNOP are equal.\par
2\par
\f4\u9702?\f0\par
. Let the edges EF, MN be in different lines; then produce ON, PM\par
to meet the lines EF and GH produced in the points J, K, L, I. Then by\par
1\par
\f4\u9702?\f0\par
the parallelopipeds ABCD\f1\endash EF GH, ABCD\endash MNOP are each equal to the\par
parallelopiped ABCD\endash IJKL. Hence they an equal to one another.\par
Cor.\emdash The volume of any parallelopiped is equal to the product of its base\par
and altitude.\par
PROP. III.\emdash Theorem.\par
A diagonal plane of a parallelopiped divides it into two prisms of equal volume.\par
185\par
1\par
\f4\u9702?\f0\par
. When the parallelopiped is rectangular the proposition is evident.\par
2\par
\f4\u9702?\f0\par
. When it is any parallelopiped, ABCD\f1\endash EF GH, the diagonal plane bisects it.\par
Dem.\emdash Through the vertices A, E let planes\par
be drawn perpendicular to the edges and cutting\par
them in the points I, J, K; L, M, N, respectively. Then [I. xxxiv.] we have IL = BF, because each is equal to AE. Hence IB = LF.\par
In like manner JC = MG. Hence the pyramid\par
A\endash IJCB agrees in everything but position with\par
E\endash LMGF; hence it is equal to it in volume. To\par
each add the solid ABC\endash LME, and we have the\par
prism AIJ\endash ELM equal to the prism ABC\endash EF G.\par
In like manner AJK\endash EMN = ACD\endash EGH; but\par
(1\f4\u9702?\f0\par
) the prism AIJ\f1\endash ELM = AJK\endash EMN. Hence\par
ABC\endash EF G = ACD\endash EGH. Therefore the diagonal plane bisects the parallelopiped.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The volume of a triangular prism is\par
equal to the product of its base and altitude; because it is half of a parallelopiped, which has a\par
double base and equal altitude.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The volume of any prism is equal to the product of its base and\par
altitude; because it can be divided into triangular prisms.\par
PROP. IV.\emdash Theorem.\par
If a pyramid (O\endash ABCDE) be cut by any plane (abcde) parallel to the base, the\par
section is similar to the base.\par
Dem.\emdash Because the plane AOB cuts the parallel planes ABCDE, abcde, the sections AB,\par
ab are parallel [XI. xvi.] In like manner BC,\par
bc are parallel. Hence the angle ABC = abc\par
[XI. x.]. In like manner the remaining angles of\par
the polygon ABCDE are equal to the corresponding angles of abcde. Again, because ab is parallel to AB, the triangles ABO, abO are equiangular.\par
Hence AB : BO :: ab : bO. [VI. iv.]\par
In like manner BO : BC :: bO : bc;\par
therefore AB : BC :: ab : bc. [Ex \f0\'e6quali.]\par
In like manner BC : CD :: bc : cd, &c.\par
Therefore the polygons ABCDE, abcde are\par
equiangular, and have the sides about their equal angles proportional. Hence\par
they are similar.\par
186\par
Cor. 1.\f1\emdash The edges and the altitude of the pyramid are similarly divided by\par
the parallel plane.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The areas of parallel sections are in the duplicate ratio of the distances of their planes from the vertex.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash In any two pyramids, sections parallel to their bases, which divide\par
their altitudes in the same ratio, are proportional to their bases.\par
PROP. V.\emdash Theorem.\par
Pyramids (P\endash ABCD, p\endash abc), having equal altitudes (P O, po) and bases\par
(ABCD, abc) of equal areas, have equal volumes.\par
Dem.\emdash If they be not equal in volume, let abc be the base of the greater;\par
and let ox be the altitude of a prism, with an equal base, and whose volume\par
is equal to their difference; then let the equal altitudes P O, po be divided into\par
such a number of equal parts, by planes parallel to the bases of the pyramids,\par
that each part shall be less than ox. Then [iv. Cor. 3] the sections made by\par
these planes will be equal each to each. Now let prisms be constructed on these\par
sections as bases and with the equal parts of the altitudes of the pyramids as\par
altitudes, and let the prisms in P\endash ABCD be constructed below the sections,\par
and in p\endash abc, above. Then it is evident that the sum of the prisms in P\endash ABCD\par
is less than that pyramid, and the sum of those on the sections of p\endash abc greater\par
than p\endash abc. Therefore the difference between the pyramids is less than the\par
difference between the sums of the prisms, that is, less than the lower prism in\par
the pyramid p\endash abc; but the altitude of this prism is less than ox (const.). Hence\par
187\par
the difference between the pyramids is less than the prism whose base is equal\par
to one of the equal bases, and whose altitude is equal to ox, and the difference\par
is equal to this prism (hyp.), which is impossible. Therefore the volumes of the\par
pyramids are equal.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash The volume of a triangular pyramid E\endash\par
ABC is one third the volume of the prism ABC\endash\par
DEF, having the same base and altitude.\par
For, draw the plane EAF, then the pyramids E\endash\par
AF C, E\endash AF D are equal, having equal bases AF C,\par
AF D, and a common altitude; and the pyramids\par
E\endash ABC, F\endash ABC are equal, having a common base\par
and equal altitudes. Hence the pyramid E\endash ABC is\par
one of three equal pyramids into which the prism is\par
divided. Therefore it is one third of the prism.\par
Cor. 2.\emdash The volume of every pyramid is onethird of the volume of a prism having an equal base\par
and altitude.\par
Because it may be divided into triangular pyramids by planes through the\par
vertex and the diagonals of the base.\par
PROP. VI.\emdash Theorem.\par
The volume of a cylinder is equal to the product of the area of its base by its\par
altitude\par
.\par
Dem.\emdash Let O be the centre of its circular base; and take the angle AOB indefinitely\par
small, so that the arc AB may be regarded as\par
a right line. Then planes perpendicular to the\par
base, and cutting it in the lines OA, OB, will\par
be faces of a triangular prism, whose base will\par
be the triangle AOB, and whose altitude will\par
be the altitude of the cylinder. The volume\par
of this prism will be equal to the area of the\par
triangle AOB by the height of the cylinder.\par
Hence, dividing the circle into elementary triangles, the cylinder will be equal to the sum of all the prisms, and therefore its\par
volume will be equal to the area of the base multiplied by the altitude.\par
Cor. 1.\emdash If r be the radius, and h the height of the cylinder,\par
vol. of cylinder = \f3\lang1032\'f0r2h.\par
Cor. 2.\f1\emdash If ABCD be a rectangle; X a line\par
in its plane parallel to the side AB; O the\par
middle point of the rectangle; the volume of\par
188\par
the solid described by the revolution of ABCD\par
round X is equal to the area of ABCD multiplied by the circumference of the circle described by O.\par
Dem.\emdash Produce the lines AD, BC to meet\par
X in the points E, F. Then when the rectangle revolves round X, the rectangles\par
ABF E, DCF E will describe cylinders whose bases will be circles having AE,\par
DE as radii, and whose common altitude will be AB. Hence the difference between the volumes of these cylinders will be equal to the differences between the\par
areas of the bases multiplied by AB, that is = \f3\'f0(AE2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 DE2\par
). AB. Therefore\par
the volume described by ABCD\par
= \f3\lang1032\'f0 . AB .(AE + DE)(AE \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 DE);\par
but AE + DE = 2OG, and AE \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 DE = AD.\par
Hence volume described by the rectangle ABCD\par
= 2\f3\lang1032\'f0 . OG . AB . AD.\par
= rectangle ABCD multiplied by the circumference of\par
the circle described by its middle point O.\par
Observation.\f1\emdash This Cor. is a simple case of Guldinus\rquote s celebrated theorem. By its assistance we give in the two following corollaries original methods of finding the volumes of the\par
cone and sphere, and it may be applied with equal facility to the solution of several other\par
problems which are usually done by the Integral Calculus.\par
Cor. 3.\emdash The volume of a cone is one-third the volume of a cylinder having\par
the same base and altitude.\par
Dem.\emdash Let ABCD be a rectangle\par
whose diagonal is AC. The triangle\par
ABC will describe a cone, and the rectangle a cylinder by revolving round AB.\par
Take two points E, F infinitely near each\par
other in AC, and form two rectangles,\par
EH, EK, by drawing lines parallel to\par
AD, AB. Now if O, O0 be the middle\par
points of these rectangles, it is evident\par
that, when the whole figure revolves round AB, the circumference of the circle\par
described by O0 will ultimately be twice the circumference of the circle described\par
by O; and since the parallelogram EK is equal to EH [I. xliii.], the solid described by EK (Cor. 1) will be equal to twice the solid described by EH. Hence,\par
if AC be divided into an indefinite number of equal parts, and rectangles corresponding to EH, EK be inscribed in the triangles ABC, ADC, the sum of\par
the solids described by the rectangles in the triangle ADC is equal to twice the\par
sum of the solids described by the rectangles in the triangle ABC\emdash that is, the\par
difference between the cylinder and cone is equal to twice the cone. Hence the\par
cylinder is equal to three times the cone.\par
Or thus: We may regard the cone and the cylinder as limiting cases of a pyramid and\par
prism having the same base and altitude; and since (v. Cor. 2) the volume of a pyramid is\par
one-third of the volume of a prism, having the same base and altitude, the volume of the cone\par
is one-third of the volume of the cylinder.\par
189\par
Cor. 4.\emdash If r be the radius of the base of a cone, and h its height,\par
vol. of cone = \f3\'f0r2h\par
3\par
.\par
Cor. 5.\f1\emdash The volume of a sphere is two-thirds of the volume of a circumscribed cylinder.\par
Dem.\emdash Let AB be the diameter of the semicircle which describes the sphere;\par
ABCD the rectangle which describes the cylinder. Take two points E, F indefinitely near each other in the semicircle. Join EF, which will be a tangent, and\par
produce it to meet the diameter P Q perpendicular to AB in N. Let R be the\par
centre. Join RE; draw EG, F H, NL parallel to AB; and EI, FK parallel to\par
P Q; and produce to meet LN in M and L; and let O, O0 be the middle points\par
of the rectangles EH, EK.\par
Now the rectangle NG . GR = P G . GQ, because each is equal to GE2\par
.\par
Hence NG : GP :: GQ : GR, or ME : IE :: RP + RG : RG. Now, denoting\par
the radii of the circles described by the points O, O0 by \f3\'f1, \'f1\par
0\par
respectively, we\par
have ultimately \'f1 = GR and \'f1\par
0 =\par
1\par
2\par
(RP + RG). Hence ME : IE :: 2\'f1\par
0\par
: \'f1; but\par
ME : IE :: rectangle EL : rectangle EK :: [I. xliii.] EH : EK;\par
\f2\u8756?\f1  \f0 EH : EK :: 2\f3\lang1032\'f1\par
0\par
: \'f1;\par
\f2\u8756?\f1  \f0 2\f3\lang1032\'f0\'f1 . EH = 2(2\'f0\'f10\par
. EK).\par
Hence the solid described by EH equal twice the solid described by EK. Therefore we infer, as in the last Cor., that the whole volume of the sphere is equal\par
190\par
to twice the difference between the cylinder and sphere. Therefore the sphere is\par
two-thirds of the cylinder.\par
Cor. 6.\f1\emdash If r be the radius of a sphere,\par
vol. = 4\f3\'f0r3\par
3\par
.\par
PROP. VII.\f1\emdash Theorem.\par
The surface of a sphere is equal to the convex surface of the circumscribed\par
cylinder.\par
Dem.\emdash Let AB be the diameter of the semicircle which describes the sphere.\par
Take two points, E, F, indefinitely near each other in the semicircle. Join EF,\par
and produce to meet the tangent CD parallel to AB in N. Draw EI, FK\par
parallel to P Q. Produce EI to meet AB in G. Let O be the centre. Join OE.\par
Now we have F E : KI :: EN : IN [VI. ii.];\par
but EN : IN :: OE : EG,\par
because the triangles ENI and OEG are similar.\par
Hence F E : KI :: OE : EG;\par
but OE = IG.\par
Hence EF : IK :: IG : EG; and IG : EG :: circumference of circle described\par
by the point I : circumference of circle described by the point E. Hence the\par
rectangle contained by EF, and circumference of circle described by E is equal\par
to the rectangle contained by IK, and circumference of circle described by I\emdash\par
that is, the portion of the spherical surface described by EF is equal to the\par
191\par
portion of the cylindrical surface described by IK. Hence it is evident, if planes\par
be drawn perpendicular to the diameter AB\emdash that the portions of cylindrical\par
and spherical surface between any two of them are equal. Hence the whole\par
spherical surface is equal to the cylindrical surface described by CD.\par
Or thus: Conceive the whole surface of the sphere divided into an indefinitely great\par
number of equal parts, then it is evident that each of these may be regarded as the base of\par
a pyramid having the centre of the sphere as a common vertex. Therefore the volume of the\par
sphere is equal to the whole area of the surface multiplied by one-third of the radius. Hence\par
if S denote the surface, we have\par
S \f0\lang1033\'d7\par
r\par
3\par
=\par
4\f3\lang1032\'f0r3\par
3\par
[vi., Cor. 6];\par
therefore S = 4\'f0r2\par
.\par
That is, the area of the surface of a sphere is equal four times the area of one of its great\par
circles.\par
Exercises.\par
1. The convex surface of a cone is equal to half the rectangle contained by the circumference\par
of the base and the slant height.\par
2. The convex surface of a right cylinder is equal to the rectangle contained by the circumference of the base and the altitude.\par
3. If P be a point in the base ABC of a triangular pyramid O\f1\endash ABC, and if parallels to\par
the edges OA, OB, OC, through P, meet the faces in the points a, b, c, the sum of the ratios\par
P a\par
OA\par
,\par
P b\par
OB\par
,\par
P c\par
OC\par
= 1.\par
4. The volume of the frustum of a cone, made by a plane parallel to the base, is equal to\par
the sum of the three cones whose bases are the two ends of the frustum, and the circle whose\par
diameter is a mean proportional between the end diameters, and whose common altitude is\par
equal to one-third of the altitude of the frustum.\par
5. If a point P be joined to the angular points A, B, C, D of a tetrahedron, and the\par
joining lines, produced if necessary, meet the opposite faces in a, b, c, d, the sum of the ratios\par
P a\par
Aa\par
,\par
P b\par
Bb\par
,\par
P c\par
Cc\par
,\par
P d\par
Dd\par
= 1.\par
6. The surface of a sphere is equal to the rectangle by its diameter, and the circumference\par
of a great circle.\par
7. The surface of a sphere is two thirds of the whole surface of its circumscribed cylinder.\par
8. If the four diagonals of a quadrangular prism be concurrent, it is a parallelopiped.\par
9. If the slant height of a right cone be equal to the diameter of its base, its total surface\par
is to the surface of the inscribed sphere as 9 : 4.\par
10. The middle points of two pairs of opposite edges of a triangular pyramid are coplanar,\par
and form a parallelogram.\par
11. If the four perpendiculars from the vertices on the opposite faces of a pyramid ABCD\par
be concurrent, then\par
AB2 + CD2 = BC2 + AD2 = CA2 + BD2\par
.\par
12. Every section of a sphere by a plane is a circle.\par
13. The locus of the centres of parallel sections is a diameter of the sphere.\par
14. If any number of lines in space pass through a fixed point, the feet of the perpendiculars\par
on them from another fixed point are homospheric.\par
15. Extend the property of Ex. 4 to the pyramid.\par
16. The volume of the ring described by a circle which revolves round a line in its plane\par
is equal to the area of the circle, multiplied by the circumference of the circle described by its\par
centre.\par
192\par
17. Any plane bisecting two opposite edges of a tetrahedron bisects its volume.\par
18. Planes which bisect the dihedral angles of a tetrahedron meet in a point.\par
19. Planes which bisect perpendicularly the edges of a tetrahedron meet in a point.\par
20. The volumes of two triangular pyramids, having a common solid angle, are proportional\par
to the rectangles contained by the edges terminating in that angle.\par
21. A plane bisecting a dihedral angle of a tetrahedron divides the opposite edge into\par
portions proportional to the areas containing that edge.\par
22. The volume of a sphere: the volume of the circumscribed cube as \f3\'f0 : 6.\par
23. If h be the height, and \'f1 the radius of a segment of a sphere, its volume is \'f0h\par
6\par
(h\par
2+3\'f1\par
2\par
).\par
24. If h be the perpendicular distance between two parallel planes, which cut a sphere in\par
sections whose radii are \'f11, \'f12, the volume of the frustum is \'f0h\par
6\par
\{h\par
2 + 3(\'f1\par
2\par
1 + \'f1\par
2\par
2\par
)\}.\par
25. If \'e4 be the distance of a point P from the centre of a sphere whose radius is R,\par
the sum of the squares of the six segments at three rectangular chords passing through P is\par
= 6R2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 2\f3\lang1032\'e4\par
2\par
.\par
26. The volume of a sphere : the volume of an inscribed cube as \'f0 : 2.\par
27. If O\f1\endash ABC be a tetrahedron whose angles AOB, BOC, COA are right, the square of\par
the area of the triangle ABC is equal to the sum of the squares of the three other triangular\par
faces.\par
28. In the same case, if p be the perpendicular from O on the face ABC,\par
1\par
p\par
2\par
=\par
1\par
OA2\par
+\par
1\par
OB2\par
+\par
1\par
OC2\par
.\par
29. If h be the height of an \f0\lang1033\'e6ronaut, and R the radius of the earth, the extent of surface\par
visible =\par
2\f3\lang1032\'f0R2h\par
R + h\par
.\par
30. If the four sides of a gauche quadrilateral touch a sphere, the points of contact are\par
concyclic.\par
193\par
NOTES.\par
NOTE A.\par
MODERN THEORY OF PARALLEL LINES.\par
In every plane there is one special line called the line at infinity. The point where any\par
other line in the plane cuts the line at infinity is called the point at infinity in that line. All\par
other points in the line are called finite points. Two lines in the plane which meet the line\par
at infinity in the same point are said to have the same direction, and two lines which meet\par
it in different points to have different directions. Two lines which have the same direction\par
cannot meet in any finite point [I. Axiom x.], and are parallel. Two lines which have different\par
directions must intersect in some finite point, since, if produced, they meet the line at infinity\par
in different points. This is a fundamental conception in Geometry, it is self-evident, and may\par
be assumed as an Axiom (see Observations on the Axioms, Book I.). Hence we may infer the\par
following general proposition:\f1\emdash\ldblquote Any two lines in the same plane must meet in some point in\par
that plane; that is\emdash (1) at infinity, when the lines have the same direction; (2) in some finite\par
point, when they have different directions.\rdblquote\emdash See Poncelet, Propri\f0\lang1033\'b4et\'b4es Projectives, page 52.\par
NOTE B.\par
legendre\f1\rquote\f0 s and hamilton\f1\rquote\f0 s proofs of euclid, I. xxxii.\par
The discovery of the Proposition that \f1\ldblquote\f0 the sum of the three angles of a triangle is equal to\par
two right angles\f1\rdblquote  \f0 is attributed to Pythagoras. Until modern times no proof of it, independent\par
of the theory of parallels, was known. We shall give here two demonstrations, each independent\par
of that theory. These are due to two of the greatest mathematicians of modern times\f1\emdash one,\par
the founder of the Theory of Elliptic Functions; the other, the discoverer of the Calculus of\par
Quaternions.\par
Legendre\rquote s Proof.\emdash Let ABC be a triangle, of which the side AC is the greatest. Bisect\par
BC in D. Join AD. Then AD is less than AC [I. xix. Ex. 5]. Now, construct a new triangle\par
AB0C0\par
, having the side AC0 = 2AD, and AB0 = AC. Again, bisect B0C0\par
in D0\par
, and form\par
another triangle AB00C00, having AC00 = 2AD0\par
, and AB00 = AC0\par
, &c. (1) The sum of the\par
angles of the triangle ABC = the sum of the angles of AB0C0\par
[I. xvi. Cor. 1] = the sum of the\par
angles of AB00C00 = the sum of the angles of AB000C000, &c. (2) The angle B0AC0\par
is less than\par
half BAC; the angle B00AC00 is less than half B0AC0\par
, and so on; hence the angle B(n)A(n)\par
will ultimately become infinitely small. (3) The sum of the base angles of any triangle of the\par
series is equal to the angle of the preceding triangle (see Dem. I. xvi.). Hence, if the annexed\par
diagram represent the triangle AB(n+1)C(n+1), the sum of the base angles A and C(n+1) is\par
194\par
equal to the angle B(n)C(n)\par
; and when n is indefinitely large, this angle is an infinitesimal;\par
hence the point B(n+1) will ultimately be in the line AC, and the angle AB(n+1)C(n+1) will\par
become a straight angle [I. Def. x.], that is, it is equal to two right angles; but the sum of the\par
angles of AB(n+1)C(n+1) is equal to the sum of the angles ABC. Hence the sum of the three\par
angles of ABC is equal to two right angles.\par
Hamilton\rquote s Quaternion Proof.\emdash Let ABC be the triangle. Produce BA to D, and\par
make AD equal to AC. Produce CB to E, and make BE equal to BD; finally, produce AC\par
to F, and make CF equal to CE. Denote the exterior angles thus formed by A0\par
, B0\par
, C0\par
. Now\par
let the leg AC of the angle A0 be turned round the point A through the angle A0\par
; then the\par
point C will coincide with D. Again, let the leg BD of the angle B0 be turned round the point\par
B through the angle B0\par
, until BD coincides with BE; then the point D will coincide with E.\par
Lastly, let CE be turned round C, through the angle C0\par
, until CE coincides with CF, and\par
the point E with F. Now, it is evident that by these rotations the point C has been brought\par
successively into the positions D, E, F; hence, by a motion of mere translation along the line\par
F C, the line CA can be brought into its former position. Therefore it follows, since rotation\par
is independent of translation, that the amount of the three rotations is equal to one complete\par
revolution round the point A; therefore A0 + B0 + C0 = four right angles; but\par
A + A\par
0 + B + B\par
0 + C + C\par
0 = six right angles [I. xiii.];\par
hence A + B + C = two right angles.\par
Observation.\emdash The foregoing demonstration is the most elementary that was ever given of\par
this celebrated Proposition. I have reduced it to its simplest form, and without making any\par
use of the language of Quaternions. The same method of proof will establish the more general\par
Proposition, that the sum of the external angles of any convex rectilineal figure is equal to\par
four right angles.\par
Mr. Abbott, f.t.c.d., has informed me that this demonstration was first given by Playfair\par
in 1826, so that Hamilton was anticipated. It has been objected to on the ground that,\par
applied verbatim to a spherical triangle, it would lead to the conclusion that the sum of the\par
angles is two right angles, which being wrong, proves that the method is not valid. A slight\par
consideration will show that the cases are different. In the proof given in the text there are\par
three motions of rotation, in each of which a point describes an arc of a circle, followed by\par
a motion of translation, in which the same point describes a right line, and returns to its\par
original position. On the surface of a sphere we should have, corresponding to these, three\par
195\par
motions of rotation, in each of which the point would describe an arc of a circle, followed by a\par
motion of rotation about the centre of the sphere, in which the point should describe an arc\par
of a great circle to return to its original position. Hence, the proof for a plane triangle cannot\par
be applied to a spherical triangle.\par
NOTE C.\par
to inscribe a regular polygon of seventeen sides in a circle.\par
Analysis.\emdash Let A be one of the angular points, AO the diameter, A1, A2, . . . A8 the vertices at one side of AO. Produce OA3 to M, and OA2 to P, making A3M = OA5, and\par
A2P = OA8. Again, cut off A6N = OA7, and A1Q = OA4. Lastly, cut off OR = ON, and\par
OS = OQ. Then we have [IV. Ex. 40],\par
\f3\lang1032\'f11\'f14 = R(\'f13 + \'f15) = R . OM,\par
\'f12\'f18 = R(\'f16 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f17) = R . ON;\par
but \'f11\'f12\'f14\'f18 =R\par
4\par
[IV. Ex. 34];\par
therefore OM . ON =R\par
2\par
(1).\par
In like manner, OP . OQ =R\par
2\par
(2).\par
Again, OM . ON = (\'f13 + \'f15)(\'f16 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f17)\par
= \'f13\'f16 + \'f15\'f16 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f13\'f17 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f15\'f17\par
= R(\'f13 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f18) + R(\'f11 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f16) \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 R(\f3\lang1032\'f12 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f17) \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 R(\f3\lang1032\'f12 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f15) [IV. Ex. 40].\par
= R(OM \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 ON \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 OP + OQ) = R(MR \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 P S) :\par
MR \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 P S = R.\par
Again, MR . P S = (OM \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 ON)(OP \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 OQ)\par
= (\f3\lang1032\'f13 + \'f15 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f16 + \'f17)(\'f12 + \'f18 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f11 + \'f14);\par
196\par
and performing the multiplication and substituting, we get\par
4R(OM \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 ON \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 OP + OQ) = 4R\par
2\par
.\par
Hence, the rectangle and the difference of the lines MR and P S being given, each is given;\par
hence MR is given; but MR = OM \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 ON; therefore OM \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 ON is given; and we have proved\par
that the rectangle OM . ON = R2\par
; therefore OM and ON are each given. In like manner,\par
OP and OQ are each given.\par
Again,\par
\f3\lang1032\'f16 . \'f17 = R(\'f11 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f14) = R . OQ, and \'f16 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f3\lang1032\'f17 = ON.\par
Hence, since OQ and ON are each given, \'f16 and \'f17 are each given; therefore we can draw these\par
chords, and we have the arc A6A7 between their extremities given; that is, the seventeenth\par
part of the circumference of a circle. Hence the problem is solved.\par
The foregoing analysis is due to Ampere: see Catalan, Th\f0\lang1033\'b4eor`emes et Probl`emes de\par
G\'b4eom\'b4etrie El\'b4ementaire. We have abridged and simplified Ampere\f1\rquote\f0 s solution.\par
NOTE D.\par
to find two mean proportionals between two given lines.\par
The problem to find two mean proportionals is one of the most celebrated in Geometry\par
on account of the importance which the ancients attached to it. It cannot be solved by the\par
line and circle, but is very easy by Conic Sections. The following is a mechanical construction\par
by the Ruler and Compass.\par
Sol.\f1\emdash Let the extremes AB, BC be placed at right angles to each other; complete the\par
rectangle ABCD, and describe a circle about it. Produce DA, DC, and let a graduated ruler\par
be made to revolve round the point B, and so adjusted that BE shall be equal to GF; then\par
AF, CE are two mean proportionals between AB, BC.\par
Dem.\emdash Since BE is equal to GF, the rectangle BE . GE = BF . GF. Therefore DE . CE\par
= DF . AF; hence DE : DF :: AF : CE; and by similar triangles, AB : AF :: DE : DF, and\par
CE : CB :: DE : DF. Hence AB : AF :: AF : CE; and AF : CE :: CE : CB. Therefore\par
AB, AF, CE, CB are continual proportions. Hence [VI. Def. iv.] AF, CE are two mean\par
proportionals between AB and BC.\par
The foregoing elegant construction is due to the ancient Geometer Philo of Byzantium.\par
If we join DG it will be perpendicular to EF. The line EF is called Philo\rquote s Line; it possesses\par
the remarkable property of being the minimum line through the point B between the fixed\par
lines DE, DF.\par
Newton\rquote s Construction.\emdash Let AB and L be the two given lines of which AB is the\par
greater. Bisect AB in C. With A as centre and AC as radius, describe a circle, and in it\par
place the chord CD equal to the second line L. Join BD, and draw by trial through A a line\par
meeting BD, CD produced in the points E, F, so that the intercept EF will be equal to the\par
radius of the circle. DE and F A are the mean proportionals required.\par
197\par
Dem.\emdash Join AD. Since the line BF cuts the sides of the 4 ACE, we have\par
AB . CD . EF = CB . DE . F A; but EF = CB;\par
therefore AB . CD = DE . F A, or\par
CD\par
DE\par
=\par
F A\par
AB\par
.\par
Again, since the 4 ACD is isosceles, we have\par
ED . EC = EA2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 AC2 = (F A + AC)\par
2 \f2\u8722?\f1  \f0 AC2\par
= 2F A . AC + F A2 = F A . AB + F A2\par
.\par
Hence ED(ED + CD) = F A(AB + F A),\par
or DE2\par
\'12\par
1 +\par
CD\par
DE \'13\par
= F A . AB \'12\par
1 +\par
AF\par
AB \'13\par
,\par
therefore DE2 = F A . AB, and we have AB . CD = DE . F A.\par
Hence AB, DE, F A, CD are in continued proportion.\par
NOTE E.\par
on philo\f1\rquote\f0 s line.\par
I am indebted to Professor Galbraith for the following proof of the minimum property of\par
Philo\f1\rquote\f0 s Line. It is due to the late Professor Mac Cullagh:\f1\emdash Let AC, CB be two given lines, E\par
a fixed point, CD a perpendicular on AB; it is required to prove, if AE is equal to DB, that\par
AB is a minimum.\par
Dem.\emdash Through E draw EM parallel to BC; make EN = EM; produce AB until\par
EP = AB. Through the points N, P draw NT, RP each parallel to AC, and through P draw\par
P Q parallel to BC. It is easy to see from the figure that the parallelogram QR is equal to the\par
parallelogram MF, and is therefore given. Through P draw ST perpendicular to EP. Now,\par
since AE = DB, BP is equal to DB; therefore P S = CD. Again, since OP = AD, P T is\par
equal to CD; therefore P S = P T. Hence QR is the maximum parallelogram in the triangle\par
SV T.\par
198\par
Again, if any other line A0B be drawn through E, and produced to P\par
0\par
, so that EP0 = AP0\par
,\par
the point P\par
0 must fall outside ST, because the parallelogram Q0R0\par
, corresponding to QR, will\par
be equal to MF, and therefore equal to QR. Hence the line EP0\par
is greater than EP, or A0B0\par
is greater than AB. Hence AB is a minimum.\par
NOTE F.\par
on the trisection of an angle.\par
The following mechanical method of trisecting an angle occurred to me several years ago.\par
Apart from the interest belonging to the Problem, it is valuable to the student as a geometrical\par
exercise:\emdash\par
To trisect a given angle ACB.\par
199\par
Sol.\emdash Erect CD perpendicular to CA; bisect the angle BCD by CG, and make the angle\par
ECI equal half a right angle; it is evident that CI will fall between CB and CA. Then, if\par
we use a jointed ruler\emdash that is two equal rulers connected by a pivot\emdash and make CB equal to\par
the length of one of these rulers, and, with C as centre and CB as radius, describe the circle\par
BAM, cutting CI in I: at I draw the tangent IG, cutting CG in G.\par
Then, since ICG is half a right angle, and CIG is right, IGC is half a right angle; therefore\par
IC is equal to IG; but IC equal CB; therefore IG = CB\emdash equal length of one of the two\par
equal rulers. Hence, if the rulers be opened out at right angles, and placed so that the pivot\par
will be at I, and one extremity at C, the other extremity at G; it is evident that the point B\par
will be between the two rulers; then, while the extremity at C remains fixed, let the other be\par
made to traverse the line GF, until the edge of the second ruler passes through B: it is plain\par
that the pivot moves along the circumference of the circle. Let CH, HF, be the positions of\par
the rulers when this happens; draw the line CH; the angle ACH is one-third of ACB.\par
Dem.\emdash Produce BC to M. Join HM. Erect BO at right angles to BM. Then, because\par
CH = HF, the angle HCF = HF C, and the angle DCE = ECB (const.). Hence the angle\par
HCD = HBC [I. xxxii.], and the right angles ACD, CBO are equal; therefore the angle\par
ACH is equal to HBO; that is [III. xxxii.], equal to HMB, or to half the angle HCB. Hence\par
ACH is one-third of ACB.\par
NOTE G.\par
on the quadrature of the circle.\par
Modern mathematicians denote the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter by\par
the symbol \f3\lang1032\'f0. Hence, if r denote the radius, the circumference will be 2\'f0r; and, since the area\par
of a circle [VI. xx. Ex. 15] is equal to half the rectangle contained by the circumference and the\par
radius, the area will be \'f0r2\par
. Hence, if the area be known, the value of \'f0 will be known; and,\par
conversely, if the value of \'f0 be known, the area is known. On this account the determination\par
of the value of \'f0 is called \f1\ldblquote\f3 the problem of the quadrature of the circle,\f1\rdblquote  \f3 and is one of the most\par
celebrated in Mathematics. It is now known that the value of \'f0 is incommensurable; that is,\par
that it cannot be expressed as the ratio of any two whole numbers, and therefore that it can\par
be found only approximately; but the approximation can be carried as far as we please, just as\par
in extracting the square root we may proceed to as many decimal places as may be required.\par
The simplest approximate value of \'f0 was found by Archimedes, namely, 22 : 7. This value is\par
tolerably exact, and is the one used in ordinary calculations, except where great accuracy is\par
required. The next to this in ascending order, viz. 355 : 113, found by Vieta, is correct to\par
six places of decimals. It differs very little from the ratio 3.1416 : 1, given in our elementary\par
books.\par
Several expeditious methods, depending on the higher mathematics, are known for calculating the value of \'f0. The following is an outline of a very simple elementary method for\par
determining this important constant. It depends on a theorem which is at once inferred from\par
VI., Ex. 87, namely \f1\ldblquote\f3 If a, A denote the reciprocals of the areas of any two polygons of the\par
same number of sides inscribed and circumscribed to a circle; a\par
0\par
, A0\par
the corresponding quantities for polygons of twice the number; a\par
0\par
is the geometric mean between a and A, and A0\par
the\par
arithmetic mean between a\par
0 and A.\f1\rdblquote  \f3 Hence, if a and A be known, we can, by the processes of\par
finding arithmetic and geometric means, find a\par
0 and A0\par
. In like manner, from a\par
0\par
, A0 we can\par
find a\par
00\par
, A00 related to a\par
0\par
, A0\par
; as a\par
0\par
, A0 are to a, A. Therefore, proceeding in this manner until\par
we arrive at values a\par
(n)\par
, A(n)\par
that will agree in as many decimal places as there are in the\par
degree of accuracy we wish to attain; and since the area of a circle is intermediate between\par
the reciprocals of a\par
(n) and A(n)\par
, the area of the circle can be found to any required degree of\par
approximation.\par
200\par
If for simplicity we take the radius of the circle to be unity, and commence with the\par
inscribed and circumscribed squares, we have\par
a = .5, A = .25.\par
a\par
0 = .3535533, A0 = .3017766.\par
a\par
00 = .3264853, A00 = .3141315.\par
These numbers are found thus: a\par
0\par
is the geometric mean between a and A; that is, between\par
.5 and .25, and A0\par
is the arithmetic mean between a\par
0 and A, or between .3535533 and .25.\par
Again, a\par
00 is the geometric mean between a\par
0 and A0\par
; and A00 the arithmetic mean between\par
a\par
00 and A0\par
. Proceeding in this manner, we find a\par
(13) = .3183099; A(13) = .3183099. Hence\par
the area of a circle radius unity, correct to seven decimal places, is equal to the reciprocal of\par
.3183099; that is, equal to 3.1415926; or the value of \'f0 correct to seven places of decimals\par
is 3.1415926. The number \'f0 is of such fundamental importance in Geometry, that mathematicians have devoted great attention to its calculation. Mr. Shanks, an English computer,\par
carried the calculation to 707 places of decimals. The following are the first 36 figures of his\par
result:\f1\emdash\par
3.141, 592, 653, 589, 793, 238, 462, 643, 383, 279, 502, 884.\par
The result is here carried far beyond all the requirements of Mathematics. Ten decimals are\par
sufficient to give the circumference of the earth to the fraction of an inch, and thirty decimals\par
would give the circumference of the whole visible universe to a quantity imperceptible with\par
the most powerful microscope.\par
201\par
CONCLUSION.\par
In the foregoing Treatise we have given the Elementary Geometry of the\par
Point, the Line, and the Circle, and figures formed by combinations of these.\par
But it is important to the student to remark, that points and lines, instead of\par
being distinct from, are limiting cases of, circles; and points and planes limiting\par
cases of spheres. Thus, a circle whose radius diminishes to zero becomes a\par
point. If, on the contrary, the circle be continually enlarged, it may have its\par
curvature so much diminished, that any portion of its circumference may be\par
made to differ in as small a degree as we please from a right line, and become\par
one when the radius becomes infinite. This happens when the centre, but not\par
the circumference, goes to infinity.\par
202\par
Index\par
Abbott, 195\par
Alternando, 128\par
Altitude, 135\par
Ampere, 197\par
Angle, 3\par
acute, 4\par
adjacent, 4\par
alternate, 29\par
bisection of, 16\par
complement of, 4\par
dihedral, 171\par
extension of meaning, 69\par
exterior, 5\par
interior, 19, 29, 31\par
legs of, 3\par
obtuse, 5\par
re-entrant, 3\par
right, 4\par
solid, 171, 180\par
supplement of, 4\par
trihedral, 171\par
trisection of, 199\par
vertex of, 3\par
Antecedent of a ratio, 118\par
Arc of a circle, 68\par
Area, 51, 154\par
Axioms, 6, 194\par
Axis\par
of symmetry, 13\par
radical, 82\par
Catalan, i, 114, 197\par
Centre, 5\par
of similitude, 153\par
radical, 82\par
Chasles, 1\par
Circle, 5\par
arc of, 68\par
chord of, 68\par
circumference, 5\par
circumscribed, 101\par
concentric, 69\par
contact of, 68, 80\par
diameter of, 5\par
escribed, 103\par
nine-points, 105\par
polar, 105\par
radius of, 5\par
sector of, 69\par
segment of, 68\par
Circumcentre, 104\par
Circumcircle, 104\par
Comberousse, i, 77\par
Componendo, 129\par
Conclusion, 7\par
Cone, 183\par
Congruent, 8\par
Contrapositive, 7\par
Convertendo, 130\par
Corollary, 8\par
Cube, 183\par
Cylinder, 183, 188\par
Demonstration, 8\par
Diagonal, 28\par
middle points of, 17\par
third of a quadrilateral, 28\par
Dividendo, 129\par
Dodecahedron, 183\par
Double point, 153\par
Enunciation, 8\par
Ex aequali, 131\par
Ex aequo perturbato, 132\par
203\par
Figures, 3\par
directly similar, 150\par
given in magnitude, 135\par
given in position, 135\par
given in species, 135\par
inversely similar, 150\par
rectilineal, 3\par
similar, 135\par
Galbraith, 198\par
Gauss, 1\par
Gnomon, 50\par
Hamilton, 150, 195\par
Harmonic conjugates, 134\par
Henrici, 2\par
Hexahedron, 183\par
Homologous terms, 121\par
Homothetic, 154\par
Hypotenuse, 4\par
Hypothesis, 7\par
Icosahedron, 183\par
Identically equal, 35\par
Identity, rule of, 8\par
Inscribed, 101\par
Invertendo, 123\par
Lardner, 91\par
Legendre, 194\par
Lemma, 8\par
Line, 2\par
divided harmonically, 134\par
Lines\par
Concurrent, 4\par
Coplanar, 171\par
Incommensurable, 62, 117\par
normal to a plane, 173\par
parallel, 28\par
pencil of, 4\par
perpendicular, 4\par
Philo\rquote s, 198\par
projection of, 28\par
segment of, 49\par
transversal, 8\par
Locus, 28\par
Lozenge, 5\par
Maximum, 74\par
McCullagh, 198\par
Median, 22\par
Minimum, 74\par
Multiples, 116\par
Newcomb, 2, 68, 69\par
Newton, 197\par
Octahedron, 183\par
Orthocentre, 105\par
Orthogonal, 100\par
parallelogram, 28\par
complements of, 39\par
Parallelopiped, 183\par
Pascal, 168\par
Pentagon, 5\par
Philo, proofs by, 15\par
Plane, 2\par
Playfair, 195\par
Points, 2\par
collinear, 3\par
concyclic, 69\par
homologous, 153\par
inverse, 82\par
row of, 3\par
Polygon, 5\par
Polyhedron, 183\par
Poncelet, 194\par
Postulate, 5\par
Prism, 183\par
Problem, 7\par
Projection, 28\par
Proportion, 118\par
extremes of, 118\par
means of, 118\par
Proportional, mean, 135, 144\par
Proportionals\par
fourth, 143\par
third, 143\par
two mean, 135, 197\par
Proposition, 7\par
contrapositive of, 7\par
204\par
converse of, 7\par
Propositions\par
identical, 64\par
obverse of, 7\par
Ptolemy\rquote s theorem, 149\par
converse of, 166\par
extension of, 166\par
Quadrature of circle, 200\par
Quadrilateral, 5\par
cyclic, 69\par
Ratio, 116, 117\par
antecedent of a, 118\par
compound, 120\par
consequent of a, 118\par
duplicate, 120\par
extreme and mean, 62\par
of greater inequality, 134\par
of lesser inequality, 134\par
reciprocal of, 118\par
Ray, 4, 69\par
Rectangle, 49\par
Rouch\f0\lang1033\'b4e, i\par
Secant, 8\par
Simson, 86\par
Solution, 8\par
Sphere, 183, 190, 191\par
Square, 5\par
Submultiple, 116\par
Surface, 2\par
Tangent, 68\par
Theorem, 7\par
converse of, 7\par
Townsend, i, 92\par
Trapezium, 28\par
Triangle, 4\par
equilateral, 4\par
isosceles, 4\par
obtuse-angled, 5\par
right-angled, 4\par
scalene, 4\par
Trihedral angle, 171\par
supplementary of, 181\par
Vertex\par
of angle, 3\par
of pencil, 4\par
205\par
THE END.\par
206\par
THIRD EDITION, Revised and Enlarged\f1\emdash 3/6, cloth.\par
A SEQUEL\par
TO THE\par
FIRST SIX BOOKS OF THE ELEMENTS OF EUCLID.\par
BY\par
JOHN CASEY, LL.D., F.R.S.,\par
Fellow of the Royal University of Ireland; Vice-President, Royal Irish Academy; &c.\par
&c.\par
Dublin: Hodges, Figgis, & Co. London: Longmans, Green, & Co.\par
EXTRACTS FROM CRITICAL NOTICES.\par
\ldblquote Nature,\rdblquote  April 17, 1884.\par
\ldblquote We have noticed (\lquote Nature,\rquote  vol. xxiv., p. 52; vol. xxvi., p. 219) two previous editions\par
of this book, and are glad to find that our favourable opinion of it has been so convincingly\par
indorsed by teachers and students in general. The novelty of this edition is a Supplement\par
of Additional Propositions and Exercises. This contains an elegant mode of obtaining the\par
circle tangential to three given circles by the methods of false positions, constructions for a\par
quadrilateral, and a full account\emdash for the first time in a text-book\emdash of the Brocard, triplicate\par
ratio, and (what the author proposes to call) the cosine circles. Dr. Casey has collected\par
together very many properties of these circles, and, as usual with him, has added several\par
beautiful results of his own. He has done excellent service in introducing the circles to the\par
notice of English students.. . .We only need say we hope that this edition may meet with as\par
much acceptance as its predecessors, it deserves greater acceptance.\rdblquote\par
The \ldblquote Mathematical Magazine,\rdblquote  Erie, Pennsylvania.\par
\ldblquote Dr. Casey, an eminent Professor of the Higher Mathematics and Mathematical Physics\par
in the Catholic University of Ireland, has just brought out a second edition of his unique\par
\lquote Sequel to the First Six Books of Euclid,\rquote  in which he has contrived to arrange and to pack\par
more geometrical gems than have appeared in any single text-book since the days of the\par
self-taught Thomas Simpson. \lquote The principles of Modern Geometry contained in the work\par
are, in the present state of Science, indispensable in Pure and Applied Mathematics, and in\par
Mathematical Physics; and it is important that the student should become early acquainted\par
with them.\rquote\par
\ldblquote Eleven of the sixteen sections into which the work is divided exhibit most excellent\par
specimens of geometrical reasoning and research. These will be found to furnish very neat\par
models for systematic methods of study. The other five sections contain 261 choice problems\par
for solution. Here the earnest student will find all that he needs to bring himself abreast\par
207\par
with the amazing developments that are being made almost daily in the vast regions of Pure\par
and Applied Geometry. On pp. 152 and 153 there is an elegant solution of the celebrated\par
Malfatti\rquote s Problem.\par
\ldblquote As our space is limited, we earnestly advise every lover of the \lquote Bright Seraphic Truth\rquote  and\par
every friend of the \lquote Mathematical Magazine\rquote  to procure this invaluable book without delay.\rdblquote\par
The \ldblquote Schoolmaster.\rdblquote\par
\ldblquote This book contains a large number of elementary geometrical propositions not given in\par
Euclid, which are required by every student of Mathematics. Here are such propositions as\par
that the three bisectors of the sides of a triangle are concurrent, needed in determining the\par
position of the centre of gravity of a triangle; propositions in the circle needed in Practical\par
Geometry and Mechanics; properties of the centres of similitudes, and the theories of inversion\par
and reciprocations so useful in certain electrical questions. The proofs are always neat, and\par
in many cases exceedingly elegant.\rdblquote\par
The \ldblquote Educational Times.\rdblquote\par
\ldblquote We have certainly seen nowhere so good an introduction to Modern Geometry, or so\par
copious a collection of those elementary propositions not given by Euclid, but which are\par
absolutely indispensable for every student who intends to proceed to the study of the Higher\par
Mathematics. The style and general get up of the book are, in every way, worthy of the\par
\lquote Dublin University Press Series,\rquote  to which it belongs.\rdblquote\par
The \ldblquote School Guardian.\rdblquote\par
\ldblquote This book is a well-devised and useful work. It consists of propositions supplementary to\par
those of the first six books of Euclid, and a series of carefully arranged exercises which follow\par
each section. More than half the book is devoted to the Sixth Book of Euclid, the chapters\par
on the \lquote Theory of Inversion\rquote  and on the \lquote Poles and Polars\rquote  being especially good. Its method\par
skilfully combines the methods of old and modern Geometry; and a student well acquainted\par
with its subject-matter would be fairly equipped with the geometrical knowledge he would\par
require for the study of any branch of physical science.\rdblquote\par
The \ldblquote Practical Teacher.\rdblquote\par
\ldblquote Professor Casey\rquote s aim has been to collect within reasonable compass all those propositions of Modern Geometry to which reference is often made, but which are as yet embodied\par
nowhere.. . .We can unreservedly give the highest praise to the matter of the book. In most\par
cases the proofs are extraordinarily neat.. . . The notes to the Sixth Book are the most satisfactory. Feuerbach\rquote s Theorem (the nine-points circle touches inscribed and escribed circles)\par
is favoured with two or three proofs, all of which are elegant. Dr. Hart\rquote s extension of it is\par
extremely well proved.. . .We shall have given sufficient commendation to the book when we\par
say, that the proofs of these (Malfatti\rquote s Problem, and Miquel\rquote s Theorem), and equally complex\par
problems, which we used to shudder to attack, even by the powerful weapons of analysis, are\par
easily and triumphantly accomplished by Pure Geometry.\par
208\par
\ldblquote After showing what great results this book has accomplished in the minimum of space, it\par
is almost superfluous to say more. Our author is almost alone in the field, and for the present\par
need scarcely fear rivals.\rdblquote\par
The \ldblquote Academy.\rdblquote\par
\ldblquote Dr. Casey is an accomplished geometer, and this little book is worthy of his reputation.\par
It is well adapted for use in the higher forms of our schools. It is a good introduction to\par
the larger works of Chasles, Salmon, and Townsend. It contains both a text and numerous\par
examples.\rdblquote\par
The \ldblquote Journal of Education.\rdblquote\par
\ldblquote Dr. Casey\rquote s \lquote Sequel to Euclid\rquote  will be found a most valuable work to any student who\par
has thoroughly mastered Euclid, and imbibed a real taste for geometrical reasoning.. . . The\par
higher methods of pure geometrical demonstration, which form by far the larger and more\par
important portion, are admirable; the propositions are for the most part extremely well given,\par
and will amply repay a careful perusal to advanced students.\rdblquote\par
209\par
PREFACE.\par
Frequent applications having been made to Dr. Casey requesting him to\par
publish a \rdblquote Key\rdblquote  containing the Solutions of the Exercises in his \rdblquote Elements of\par
Euclid,\rdblquote  but his professorial and other duties scarcely leaving him any time to\par
devote to it, I undertook, under his direction, the task of preparing one. Every\par
Solution was examined and approved of by him before writing it for publication,\par
so that the work may be regarded as virtually his.\par
The Exercises are a joint selection made by him and the late lamented Professor Townsend, s.f.t.c.d., and form one of the finest collections ever published.\par
JOSEPH B. CASEY.\par
86, South Circular-road,\par
December 23, 1886.\par
210\par
Price 4/6, post free.]\par
THE FIRST SIX BOOKS\par
OF THE\par
ELEMENTS OF EUCLID,\par
With Copious Annotations and Numerous Exercises.\par
BY\par
JOHN CASEY, LL.D., F.R.S.,\par
Fellow of the Royal University of Ireland; Vice-President, Royal Irish Academy; &c.\par
&c.\par
Dublin: Hodges, Figgis, & Co. London: Longmans, Green, & Co.\par
OPINIONS OF THE WORK.\par
The following are a few of the Opinions received by Dr. Casey on this\par
Work:\emdash\par
\ldblquote Teachers no longer need be at a loss when asked which of the numerous \lquote Euclids\rquote  they\par
recommend to learners. Dr. Casey\rquote s will, we presume, supersede all others.\rdblquote\emdash The Dublin\par
Evening Mail.\par
\ldblquote Dr. Casey\rquote s work is one of the best and most complete treatises on Elementary Geometry we have seen. The annotations on the several propositions are specially valuable to\par
students.\rdblquote\emdash The Northern Whig.\par
\ldblquote His long and successful experience as a teacher has eminently qualified Dr. Casey for the\par
task which he has undertaken.. . .We can unhesitatingly say that this is the best edition of\par
Euclid that has been yet offered to the public.\rdblquote\emdash The Freeman\rquote s Journal.\par
From the Rev. R. Townsend, F.T.C.D., &c.\par
\ldblquote I have no doubt whatever of the general adoption of your work through all the schools\par
of Ireland immediately, and of England also before very long.\rdblquote\par
From George Francis FitzGerald, Esq., F.T.C.D.\par
\rdblquote Your work on Euclid seems admirable, and is a great improvement in most ways on\par
its predecessors. It is a great thing to call the attention of students to the innumerable\par
variations in statement and simple deductions from propositions.. . . I should have preferred\par
some modification of Euclid to a reproduction, but I suppose people cannot be got to agree\par
to any.\rdblquote\par
211\par
From H. J. Cooke, Esq., The Academy, Banbridge.\par
\rdblquote In the clearness, neatness, and variety of demonstrations, it is far superior to any textbook yet published, whilst the exercises are all that could be desired.\rdblquote\par
From James A. Poole, M.A., 29, Harcourt-street, Dublin.\par
\rdblquote This work proves that Irish Scholars can produce Class-books which even the Head\par
Masters of English Schools will feel it a duty to introduce into their establishments.\rdblquote\par
From Professor Leebody, Magee College, Londonderry.\par
\rdblquote So far as I have had time to examine it, it seems to me a very valuable addition to\par
our text-books of Elementary Geometry, and a most suitable introduction to the \lquote Sequel to\par
Euclid,\rquote  which I have found an admirable book for class teaching.\rdblquote\par
From Mrs. Bryant, F.C.P., Principal of the North London Collegiate School for Girls.\par
\rdblquote I am heartily glad to welcome this work as a substitute for the much less elegant textbooks in vogue here. I have begun to use it already with some of my classes, and find that\par
the arrangement of exercises after each proposition works admirably.\rdblquote\par
From the Rev. J. E. Reffe\f0\'b4, French College, Blackrock.\par
\f1\rdblquote\f0 I am sure you will soon be obliged to prepare a Second Edition. I have ordered fifty\par
copies more of the Euclid (this makes 250 copies for the French College). They all like the\par
book here.\f1\rdblquote\f0\par
From the Nottingham Guardian.\par
\f1\rdblquote\f0 The edition of the First Six Books of Euclid by Dr. John Casey is a particularly useful\par
and able work.. . . The illustrative exercises and problems are exceedingly numerous, and have\par
been selected with great care. Dr. Casey has done an undoubted service to teachers in\par
preparing an edition of Euclid adapted to the development of the Geometry of the present\par
day.\f1\rdblquote\f0\par
From the Leeds Mercury.\par
\f1\rdblquote\f0 There is a simplicity and neatness of style in the solution of the problems which will\par
be of great assistance to the students in mastering them.. . . At the end of each proposition\par
there is an examination paper upon it, with deductions and other propositions, by means\par
of which the student is at once enabled to test himself whether he has fully grasped the\par
principles involved.. . . Dr. Casey brings at once the student face to face with the difficulties\par
to be encountered, and trains him, stage by stage, to solve them.\f1\rdblquote\f0\par
From the Practical Teacher.\par
\f1\rdblquote\f0 The preface states that this book \f1\lquote\f0 is intended to supply a want much felt by Teachers\par
at the present day\f1\endash the production of a work which, while giving the unrivalled original in all\par
its integrity, would also contain the modern conceptions and developments of the portion of\par
Geometry over which the elements extend.\rquote\par
\rdblquote The book is all, and more than all, it professes to be.. . . The propositions suggested are\par
such as will be found to have most important applications, and the methods of proof are both\par
simple and elegant. We know no book which, within so moderate a compass, puts the student\par
in possession of such valuable results.\par
\rdblquote The exercises left for solution are such as will repay patient study, and those whose\par
solution are given in the book itself will suggest the methods by which the others are to be\par
demonstrated. We recommend everyone who wants good exercises in Geometry to get the\par
book, and study it for themselves.\rdblquote\par
212\par
From the Educational Times.\par
\rdblquote The editor has been very happy in some of the changes he has made. The combination of\par
the general and particular enunciations of each proposition into one is good; and the shortening\par
of the proofs, by omitting the repetitions so common in Euclid, is another improvement. The\par
use of the contra-positive of a proved theorem is introduced with advantage, in place of\par
the reductio ad absurdum; while the alternative (or, in some cases, substituted) proofs are\par
numerous, many of them being not only elegant but eminently suggestive. The notes at the\par
end of the book are of great interest, and much of the matter is not easily accessible. The\par
collection of exercises, \lquote of which there are nearly eight hundred,\rquote  is another feature which will\par
commend the book to teachers. To sum up, we think that this work ought to be read by\par
every teacher of Geometry; and we make bold to say that no one can study it without gaining\par
valuable information, and still more valuable suggestions.\rdblquote\par
From the Journal of Education, Sept. 1, 1883.\par
\rdblquote In the text of the propositions, the author has adhered, in all but a few instances, to\par
the substance of Euclid\rquote s demonstrations, without, however, giving way to a slavish following\par
of his occasional verbiage and redundance. The use of letters in brackets in the enunciations\par
eludes the necessity of giving a second or particular enunciation, and can do no harm. Hints\par
of other proofs are often given in small type at the end of a proposition, and, where necessary,\par
short explanations. The definitions are also carefully annotated. The theory of proportion,\par
Book V., is given in an algebraical form. This book has always appeared to us an exquisitely\par
subtle example of Greek mathematical logic, but the subject can be made infinitely simpler\par
and shorter by a little algebra, and naturally the more difficult method has yielded place to\par
the less. It is not studied in schools, it is not asked for even in the Cambridge Tripos; a few\par
years ago, it still survived in one of the College Examinations at St. John\rquote s, but whether the\par
reforming spirit which is dominant there has left it, we do not know. The book contains a\par
very large body of riders and independent geometrical problems. The simpler of these are\par
given in immediate connexion with the propositions to which they naturally attach; the more\par
difficult are given in collections at the end of each book. Some of these are solved in the book,\par
and these include many well-known theorems, properties of orthocentre, of nine-point circle,\par
&c. In every way this edition of Euclid is deserving of commendation. We would also express\par
a hope that everyone who uses this book will afterwards read the same author\rquote s \lquote Sequel to\par
Euclid,\rquote  where he will find an excellent account of more modern Geometry.\rdblquote\par
NOW READY, Price 6s.,\par
A KEY to the EXERCISES in the ELEMENTS of EUCLID.\par
213\par
Typographical Errors corrected in Project Gutenberg edition\par
p. 28. \ldblquote Def. viii.\emdash When a right line intersects . . . \rdblquote  in original, amended\par
to \ldblquote Def. vii\rdblquote  in sequence.\par
p. 37. 12 \ldblquote bisects the parallellogram\rdblquote  in original, amended to match every\par
other occurrence as \ldblquote parallelogram\rdblquote .\par
p. 53. \ldblquote 4ACH is half the rectangle AC . AH (I. Cor. 1)\rdblquote  in original. The\par
reference is to Prop. I. of the current book and misnumbered, it should be (i.\par
Cor. 2).\par
p. 54. \ldblquote The parallelogram CM is equal to DE [I. xliii., Cor. 3];\rdblquote  in original,\par
amended to \ldblquote Cor. 2\rdblquote  following MS. correction: there is no Cor. 3.\par
p. 56. \ldblquote On CB describe the square CBEF I. [xlvi.].\rdblquote  in original, clearly\par
meant to read [I. xlvi.].\par
p. 70. \ldblquote The remainiug parts of the line\rdblquote  in original, obvious error amended\par
to \ldblquote remaining\rdblquote .\par
p. 73. \ldblquote that which is nearest to the line throuyh the centre\rdblquote  in original,\par
obvious error amended to \ldblquote through\rdblquote .\par
p. 78. \ldblquote Then this line [I., Cor. 1]\rdblquote  in original. The reference is to Prop. I. of\par
the current book, so it should be [i., Cor. 1].\par
p. 79. \ldblquote OA is equal to OC [I., Def. xxii.]\rdblquote  in original. The reference should\par
be [I., Def. xxxii.].\par
p. 84. \ldblquote the four points A, C, D, B are concylic\rdblquote  in original, evidently intended is \ldblquote concyclic\rdblquote .\par
p. 87. as p. 78.\par
p. 94. \ldblquote Through tho point E\rdblquote  in original, obvious error amended to \ldblquote the\rdblquote .\par
p. 95., p. 97. \ldblquote the points A, B, C, D are concylic\rdblquote  in original, as p. 84.\par
p. 97. \ldblquote (Ex. 2.) . . . or touchlng a given file and a given circle.\rdblquote  in original,\par
obvious error amended to \ldblquote touching\rdblquote .\par
p. 98. \ldblquote 21. What is the locus of the middle points . . . \rdblquote  in original, amended\par
to \ldblquote 31.\rdblquote  in sequence.\par
p. 99. In (21) \ldblquote the if then line DE intersect the chords . . . \rdblquote  in original,\par
garbled phrase amended to \ldblquote then if the\rdblquote .\par
p. 100. In (44) \ldblquote these circle sintersect\rdblquote  in original, misplaced space amended\par
to \ldblquote these circles intersect\rdblquote .\par
p. 105. \ldblquote 4. The point of bisection (1) of the line (OP)\rdblquote  in original, from the\par
diagram and following discussion this should be (I).\par
p. 107. Prop. IX. \ldblquote About a given circle (ABCD) to describe a circle.\rdblquote  in\par
original, clearly this is nonsense and must mean \ldblquote About a given square\rdblquote .\par
p. 110. \ldblquote Then the traingles ABO, CBO\rdblquote  in original, obvious error amended\par
to \ldblquote triangles\rdblquote .\par
p. 115. In (52) \ldblquote and also en equilateral circumscribed polygon\rdblquote  in original,\par
wrong letter amended to \ldblquote an\rdblquote .\par
p. 133. Heading \ldblquote PROP. XXV.\emdash Problem.\rdblquote  in original, the preamble to\par
this book says that every Proposition in it is a Theorem and this one seems to\par
be no exception, so amended.\par
214\par
p. 136. Reference \ldblquote [I.]\rdblquote  is to Proposition I. of current book, amended to \ldblquote [i.]\rdblquote\par
(4 times).\par
p. 137 sqq. Reference \ldblquote [II.]\rdblquote  is to Proposition II. of current book, amended\par
to \ldblquote [ii.]\rdblquote  (4 times).\par
p. 139. Prop V. header \ldblquote subtended bg the homologous sides\rdblquote  in original,\par
obvious error amended to \ldblquote by\rdblquote .\par
p. 147. Reference \ldblquote [XVI.]\rdblquote  corrected to \ldblquote [xvi.]\rdblquote .\par
p. 150. \ldblquote From the construction is is evident . . . \rdblquote  in original, obvious error\par
amended to \ldblquote it is\rdblquote .\par
p. 165. \ldblquote 20. Find a poiat O\rdblquote  in original, obvious error amended to \ldblquote point\rdblquote .\par
p. 175. \ldblquote the lines GH, GK each perpendiclar to EF\rdblquote  in original, obvious\par
error amended to \ldblquote perpendicular\rdblquote .\par
p. 186. \ldblquote O\rdblquote  when associated with a lower case letter was wrongly printed as\par
o, which is not defined. These have been corrected (3 times).\par
p. 192. Reference \ldblquote [VI., Cor. 6]\rdblquote  corrected to \ldblquote [vi., Cor. 6]\rdblquote .\par
215\par
End of Project Gutenberg\rquote s First Six Books of the Elements of Euclid,\par
by John Casey\par
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELEMENTS OF EUCLID ***\par
*** This file should be named 21076-t.tex or 21076-t.zip ***\par
*** or 21076-pdf.pdf or 21076-pdf.pdf ***\par
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:\par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/0/7/21076/ }}{\fldrslt{http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/0/7/21076/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22\par
Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Keith Edkins and the Online\par
Distributed Proofreading Team at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.pgdp.net }}{\fldrslt{http://www.pgdp.net\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22\par
(This file was produced from images from the Cornell University\par
Library: Historical Mathematics Monographs collection.)\par
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions\par
will be renamed.\par
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no\par
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation\par
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without\par
permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,\par
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to\par
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to\par
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project\par
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you\par
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If\par
you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with\par
the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any\par
purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances\par
and research. They may be modified and printed and given away--you\par
may do practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.\par
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially\par
commercial redistribution.\par
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***\par
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE\par
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK\par
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free\par
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work\par
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project\par
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project\par
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at\par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://gutenberg.org/license }}{\fldrslt{http://gutenberg.org/license\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22 ).\par
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm\par
electronic works\par
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm\par
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to\par
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property\par
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all\par
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy\par
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.\par
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project\par
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the\par
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or\par
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.\par
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be\par
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who\par
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few\par
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works\par
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See\par
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project\par
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement\par
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\par
works. See paragraph 1.E below.\par
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"\par
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project\par
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the\par
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an\par
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are\par
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from\par
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative\par
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg\par
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project\par
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by\par
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of\par
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with\par
the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by\par
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project\par
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.\par
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern\par
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in\par
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check\par
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement\par
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or\par
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project\par
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning\par
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United\par
States.\par
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:\par
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate\par
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently\par
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the\par
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project\par
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,\par
copied or distributed:\par
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with\par
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or\par
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included\par
with this eBook or online at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK www.gutenberg.org }}{\fldrslt{www.gutenberg.org\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22\par
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived\par
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is\par
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied\par
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees\par
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work\par
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the\par
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1\par
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the\par
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or\par
1.E.9.\par
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted\par
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution\par
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional\par
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked\par
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the\par
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.\par
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm\par
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this\par
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.\par
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this\par
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without\par
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with\par
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project\par
Gutenberg-tm License.\par
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,\par
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any\par
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or\par
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than\par
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version\par
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site ({{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK www.gutenberg.org }}{\fldrslt{www.gutenberg.org\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22 ),\par
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a\par
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon\par
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other\par
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm\par
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.\par
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,\par
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works\par
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.\par
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing\par
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided\par
that\par
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from\par
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method\par
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is\par
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he\par
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the\par
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments\par
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you\par
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax\par
returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and\par
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the\par
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to\par
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."\par
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies\par
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he\par
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm\par
License. You must require such a user to return or\par
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium\par
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of\par
Project Gutenberg-tm works.\par
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any\par
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the\par
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days\par
of receipt of the work.\par
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free\par
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.\par
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm\par
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set\par
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from\par
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael\par
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the\par
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.\par
1.F.\par
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable\par
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread\par
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm\par
collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\par
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain\par
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or\par
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual\par
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a\par
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by\par
your equipment.\par
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right\par
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project\par
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project\par
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project\par
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all\par
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal\par
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT\par
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE\par
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE\par
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE\par
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR\par
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH\par
DAMAGE.\par
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a\par
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can\par
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a\par
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you\par
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with\par
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with\par
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a\par
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity\par
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to\par
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy\par
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further\par
opportunities to fix the problem.\par
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth\par
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you \rquote AS-IS\rquote  WITH NO OTHER\par
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO\par
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.\par
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied\par
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.\par
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the\par
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be\par
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by\par
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any\par
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.\par
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the\par
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone\par
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance\par
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,\par
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,\par
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,\par
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do\par
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm\par
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any\par
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.\par
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm\par
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of\par
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers\par
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists\par
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from\par
people in all walks of life.\par
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the\par
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm\rquote s\par
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will\par
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project\par
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure\par
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.\par
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation\par
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4\par
and the Foundation web page at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.pglaf.org }}{\fldrslt{http://www.pglaf.org\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22 .\par
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive\par
Foundation\par
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit\par
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the\par
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal\par
Revenue Service. The Foundation\rquote s EIN or federal tax identification\par
number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at\par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://pglaf.org/fundraising }}{\fldrslt{http://pglaf.org/fundraising\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22 . Contributions to the Project Gutenberg\par
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent\par
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state\rquote s laws.\par
The Foundation\rquote s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.\par
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered\par
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at\par
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email\par
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact\par
information can be found at the Foundation\rquote s web site and official\par
page at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://pglaf.org }}{\fldrslt{http://pglaf.org\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22\par
For additional contact information:\par
Dr. Gregory B. Newby\par
Chief Executive and Director\par
gbnewby@pglaf.org\par
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg\par
Literary Archive Foundation\par
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide\par
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of\par
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be\par
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest\par
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations\par
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt\par
status with the IRS.\par
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating\par
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United\par
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a\par
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up\par
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations\par
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To\par
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any\par
particular state visit {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://pglaf.org }}{\fldrslt{http://pglaf.org\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22\par
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we\par
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition\par
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who\par
approach us with offers to donate.\par
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make\par
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from\par
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.\par
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation\par
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other\par
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.\par
To donate, please visit: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://pglaf.org/donate }}{\fldrslt{http://pglaf.org/donate\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22\par
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\par
works.\par
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm\par
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared\par
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project\par
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.\par
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed\par
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.\par
unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily\par
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.\par
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:\par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.gutenberg.org }}{\fldrslt{http://www.gutenberg.org\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs22\par
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,\par
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary\par
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to\par
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.\par
*** END: FULL LICENSE ***\f0\lang9\par
}
 